
 
MEDIA TRANSCRIPTS, INC. 
41 WEST 83rd STREET  NEW YORK, N.Y.  10024   (212)  362-1481 

 
PROGRAM Intelligence Squared US 

America is too damn religious 
  

BGT NO.  . 

  

 PETER STEINFELS  
Good evening.  I'd like to encourage people to come in and fill in 

the seats, even up in the front.  Uh there's not going to be a 

collection or an altar call so it's OK.  [LAUGHTER] I am Peter 

Steinfels.  And as moderator of this debate on whether America is 

too damn religious, I’ve been asked to offer the opening prayer.  

[LAUGHTER] It's very simple.  We pray that all cell phones, 

pagers, Blackberrys, blueberries, strawberries, personal video 

games or anything else that beeps, squeaks or plays the  William 

Tell overture or otherwise announced itself,  be turned off for the 

duration of the evening.  And if some people should fail to do this, 

may heaven open and turn them into pillars of salt, Amen.  

[APPLAUSE]  We look forward to an exciting, stimulating and 

enjoyable exchange of ideas.  Tonight's debate like its 

predecessors is being taped for radio broadcast.  With each of 

these debates, this taping has grown more expert and refined.  

And there are now, I am told, microphones everywhere, hanging 

from the rafters, on the sides of the stage, probably in your lapels.  

And one result of this extraordinary taping is that certain sounds 

are magnified and distorted.  I'm also told that unwrapping candy 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 2. 

or otherwise wrinkling cellophane sounds like fire breaking out in 

the auditorium.  So if you anticipate an irrepressible need for a 

Snickers bar or a fresh packet of Kleenex to dab your eyes in 

response to our speakers' eloquence, please unwrap it right now.  

A further word about response this evening.  Naturally we will all 

give our outstanding debaters a respectful hearing.  No jeers, cat 

calls, throwing cabbages and so on.  But applause is very 

welcome.  And the sound engineers can pick up all its gradations 

from tepid to exuberant.  Especially if they have something of a 

sound check.  And so if you don't mind, I'd like to ask you right 

now, could you give us a round of say polite applause?   

[APPLAUSE] Thank you very much, that was very polite.  Perhaps 

bordering on the apathetic, but...  [LAUGHTER] Now can we have 

an example of enthusiastic support.  [APPLAUSE] I know I'd 

better not ask you for mindless frenzy.  As the debaters make 

their opening statements this evening, you may be readying your 

own brief questions for the question and answer portion to follow.  

If you want three by five cards to write down your questions and 

that usually helps those of us who are shy and those of us who 

need some discipline, once we overcome that shyness, lest we be 

long winded, uh the ushers will provide you with such a card.  

And it is now my pleasure to introduce the chairman of the 

Rosenkranz Foundation, the sponsor of this evening's event, 

please welcome Robert Rosenkranz.  [APPLAUSE]    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 3. 

 ROBERT ROSENKRANZ 
Well thank you that was polite.  [CHUCKLES] I'm here with Dana 

Wolfe, the executive producer of this debate series.  And it's my 

pleasure to welcome you.  This is our first debate of our spring 

season, but you wouldn't know it was spring by being outside.  

We're thrilled that WNYC is recording this series of debates and 

that through National Public Radio you'll be able to hear this 

debate on public radio stations around the country.  We also 

value the sponsorship of the Times of London.  And I want to 

especially thank our moderator, Peter Steinfels, who I'll formally 

introduce in a moment and the extraordinary group of panelists 

who are the real stars of tonight's event.  You know, I was looking 

at some opinion polls taken abroad in preparation for my remarks 

tonight and I find that sixty percent of respondents in France and 

Holland think that America is too religious.  And people who 

think that also tend to be pretty anti-American.  In Pakistan, 

sixty percent of people are anti-American and they consider that 

we're not religious enough.  They're offended by the secular 

nature of our culture.  Uh and um so, maybe we can't win or 

maybe we've got it just right.  What has been called our civil 

religion has a sacred history in America.  Words from the 

Declaration of Independence—we hold these truths to be self 

evident.  That we are endowed by our Creator with certain 

inalienable rights.  The Gettysburg Address, four score and seven, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 4. 

invokes the cadences of the Bible.  Our Thanksgiving, our major 

national holiday, thanks providence for America and invites us to 

meditate on our meaning.  The Fourth of July celebrates liberty, 

Memorial Day – sacrifice.  The moral [00;06;10;12] imperatives of 

religion lead to an outpouring of support for victims of genocide in 

Rwanda.  For victims of AIDS in Africa.  For victims of national 

disasters anywhere on the planet.  For a large and increasing 

number of Americans, Evangelical or Pentecostal churches give 

them what they need to live more responsible, more energetic, 

more meaningful lives.  But as Mahatma Ghandi said, “those who 

say that religion has nothing to do with politics, do not know 

what religion is.”  And our politics seem to have a great deal to do 

with religion these days.  Controversies persist over gay marriage, 

stem cell research.  The under God language of the Pledge of 

Allegiance.  Vouchers for parochial school students.  The fitness 

for a Mormon to run for President of the United States.  Are these 

normal issues in the usual force of political discourse?  Or are 

they evidence that America is indeed too damn religious?  Well 

let's see what our esteemed panelists have to say and which side 

of the motion will carry the day.  Our moderator this evening is 

Peter Steinfels. Professor at Fordham University.  Co-director of 

their Center on Religion and Culture, and a religion columnist for 

The New York Times.  Peter created and continues to write his bi-

weekly column, Beliefs, dealing with religion and ethics in the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 5. 

Times.   He's written numerous books on religion, including A 

People Adrift: The Crisis of the Roman Catholic Church in America.  

It's now my pleasure to hand the evening over to Peter.  

[APPLAUSE]    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you very much Bob for your introduction.  I would now 

also welcome you to the fifth Intelligence Squared US debate.  

And I'd like to try and give you a brief rundown of the evening.  

First, the proponents of the motion will start by presenting their 

side of the argument.  The opposition will follow.  Each person 

will get a maximum of eight minutes and we will go back and 

forth from one side to the other.  Second, when all six speakers 

are finished with their opening remarks, I will open up the floor to 

some brief questions from the audience and perhaps toss in a few 

of my own.  Third when the Q and A is complete, each debater 

will have the opportunity to make a final statement lasting not 

more than two minutes per person.  Fourth, during the closing 

statements ballot boxes will be passed around for voting.  This is 

the ticket.  Whoops.  This is the ballot box which has come 

suspiciously open in my picking it up.  [LAUGHTER] You will uh 

be asked to put in either the for piece, the against piece or the 

whole ticket if you still not – if you still haven't made up your 

mind as to which side you favor.   If anyone does not have a ticket 

ballot, an usher will get you one at the appropriate time.  Fifth 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 6. 

and last, after the final closing statement is made, I will 

announce the results of the audience vote and tell you which side 

carried the day.  Let me now introduce the panel which I'm very 

proud to do.  For the motion, author and program director of the 

think tank, the Center for Inquiry, Susan Jacoby.  Executive 

Director of Americans United For Separation of Church and State, 

attorney and ordained minister, Barry W. Lynn.  And  author, 

professor of political science and director of the Boisi Center for 

Religion and American Public Life at Boston College, Alan Wolfe.  

Against the motion, the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Professor of 

Social and Political Ethics at the University of Chicago, political 

philosopher Jean Bethke Elshtain.  Senior Fellow in the 

Brookings Institution's Governance Studies Program and College 

Park Professor at the University of Maryland, William A. Galston.   

And the Henry W. Putnam Professor in religion at Princeton 

University, religious historian Albert J. Raboteau.  And I think all 

of you know that there are even more extended biographies of our 

panelists this evening in the programs.  So we will begin.  Like to 

start out with a speaker for, to take the podium, for tonight's 

motion.  Uh Barry Lynn. [APPLAUSE]    

 BARRY W. LYNN  
Thank you very much.  Uh so now that you know that I'm both a 

minister and a lawyer, you know that I'm capable of forgiving you 

but going on to sue you anyway.  [LAUGHTER] Um now what is it, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 7. 

why is it that a church going, Jesus-accepting member of the 

Christian clergy is on this side of the platform tonight?  And the 

answer really lies in the very carefully worded proposition that is 

under debate this evening.  That America is too damn religious.  I 

don't think there is too much religion in America.  Although my 

own colleagues actually might disagree with that.  But I clearly 

think there's too much of the damnable kind.  What is a damned 

religion?  Damned religion is a religion so weak willed and unsure 

of its own capacity to persuade others to support it or live by its 

guidance that it seeks the blessing of government.  That it seeks 

financial aid from government.  And that it even tries to convert 

its theological beliefs into legislative fiats.  This damned form of 

religion is a corruption both of faith and of constitutional 

democracy.  And it makes a mockery of the best in our history.  It 

was the fifth United States Congress that unanimously approved 

the Treaty of Tripoli which unequivocally stated that this was in 

no way founded as a Christian nation.  Thomas Jefferson refused 

to sign proclamations of prayer or resolutions of thanksgiving, 

believing how shocking is this, that it should be religious bodies, 

not governmental ones that decided what days should bring forth 

the greatest prayer from the American people.  And James 

Madison even objected to the 1790 census form because it had a 

question merely asking you if you were a member of the clergy.   

Indeed, throughout most of our American history we've been 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 8. 

moving toward a greater embrace of religious diversity.  A greater 

rejection of the idea that government, federal or state should pick 

favorites among religions or choose religion over non-religion.  By 

1960 then presidential aspirant John F. Kennedy addressed a 

meeting of Southern Baptists concerned about his allegiances as 

a Roman Catholic, to declare, “I believe in an America where the 

separation of church and state is absolute.”  But what a 

difference a few decades can make.  Now politicians see as much 

advantage in pandering to religion as the embarrassingly religion 

seems to gain or try to gain by seeking the assistance of 

government.  So it's a dual corruption, tainting the secular nature 

of our government and making religious groups special interest 

supplicants at what is often a quite odoriferous public trough.  

[APPLAUSE] So let me just briefly go into these uh specifics in 

these minutes remaining, of how this unholy matrimony kind of 

plays out in the 21st century.  First, religious  groups too often, if 

you will, seek the blessing of government.  A few examples.  As if 

the nation were somehow absent private property, now we see 

public spaces increasingly festooned with more and more 

religious icons and images, monuments and scriptural citations.  

Almost always at the behest of the currently statistically most 

popular religion in America, Christianity.  Now I concede that a 

lot of Americans like it that way. In a December poll for example, 

seventy eight percent of the respondents said they wanted to 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 9. 

continue to see nativity scenes outside their local government 

offices.  But curiously in the same poll only fifty three percent 

said they were actually planning to attend a worship service at 

Christmas.  Is it really good for religion when its adherents in 

larger numbers would like to catch a quick glimpse of Jesus in a 

manger, possibly surrounded by a few reindeer and candy canes, 

rather than actually spend an hour sitting for a religious 

ceremony.  It can't be.  Or how about the reasoning used in a 

constitutional challenge to Ohio's official motto – “With God all 

things are possible.”  The federal appeals court upheld the 

continued use of the seal, claiming that the phrase had 

essentially lost its religious significance.  [LAUGHTER] There was 

widespread applause from the religious right.  But again to me 

how can you be happy as a spiritual person when a court notes 

that the statement that God is both alive and omnipotent is seen 

as theologically meaningless form overuse.  I should note 

sometimes occasionally legislators also go beyond this.  They 

confuse religion with magic.  After every major uh school shooting 

in the United States, members of Congress insist that if we posted 

the Ten Commandments on every school room wall we would stop 

the next violent student uprising from occurring.  They're never 

willing to talk about gun control.  They're never willing to even 

talk about spending money to work with at risk young people but 

the decalogue display is the panacea.  But you know if proximity 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 10. 

to holy words really made us better people then the presence of 

Gideon Bibles in nightstands at motels would have ended 

adultery long ago and its has not.  [LAUGHTER] It is not that 

simple.  Now second, dissatisfied with some powerful symbolic 

support, some groups even go further and actually want to 

receive from the public treasury the tax dollars of all of this.  

Funding.  President Bush likes this idea.  He created an office of 

faith based initiatives back in 2001 to get more money for what 

he called the armies of compassion around America who cared for 

the poor, the hungry and the homeless.  What he forgot to tell us 

is that government had been partnering with many religious 

organizations for many decades in this county with just two little 

caveats.  First, any program that got federal money had to forget 

evangelizing in that program.  So that if money went to 

counseling people suffering from addiction, you had to stick to 

medical and psychological counseling with those federal dollars 

and leave the idea of getting right with God to some other 

separately funded program.  Second, it was presumed that you 

only got tax dollars to provide secular services and that you had 

to therefore hire the most qualified person for the job regardless 

of any preference you might wish to give on the basis of religious 

belief or affiliation.  But for the President those caveats were just 

technicalities.  He told an audience in New Orleans just one year 

before he forgot that the city existed that he saw his program as 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 11. 

one that would give funds to groups that are saving Americans 

one soul at a time.  Once again confusing his role as Commander 

in Chief of that of theologian in chief.  He claimed that hiring by 

faith groups could be done without regard to civil rights laws 

against discrimination and I find that such an absurd 

commentary for the early twenty first century.  Does anyone think 

that Baptists or Buddhists or Atheists or Adventists actually ladle 

the food in a soup kitchen differently?  Does it make any 

difference to you as a person living in a homeless shelter 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES]   

 PETER STEINFELS  
One minute warning.   

 BARRY W. LYNN 
Whether that – uh Adventist has tucked in your bed sheet or an 

Atheist has done it.  Final characteristic of damned religion is the 

most pernicious.  That's where religious groups decide that 

because they are sure that they have a Biblical understanding of 

an issue, say the right of reproductive choice, no one will be 

dared to have another opinion and act on it.  That's why they 

seek things like constitutional amendments to prohibit all 

abortion.  I know that there are people on the other side of this 

debate who will say that there is great evidence of progressive 

thinking in churches now and in the past and obviously that's 

true.  But I remind you that Dr. Martin Luther King never created 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 12. 

a hundred million dollar dialing for dollars ministry on television.  

He never endorsed a single candidate from any pulpit in America.  

He knew that the long arc of justice would reach its goal only 

when all Americans, black and white, young and old, believer and 

non-believer, would count on the Constitution as the last great 

protector of the rights of the people.   That's the faith that ought 

to guide religion in America but regrettably it's the damned kind 

that seems to get all the attention and have all the clout today.  

And luckily because I am not running for any elective 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES]   

 PETER STEINFELS  
If you'll wrap it up [OVERLAPPING VOICES]  

 BARRY W. LYNN 
...office, I do not have to say at the end of this small speech, God 

Bless America.  [LAUGHTER] [APPLAUSE]   

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you very much Barry Lynn.  And now the first speaker 

against the motion, Jean Bethke Elshtain.  [APPLAUSE]    

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN  
America is too damn religious.  Says who?  We could ask our 

greatest presidential theologian Abraham Lincoln, who references 

God fourteen times in the four paragraphs of his masterpiece of 

American political rhetoric, the second inaugural address.  We 

could ask Martin Luther King with the rhythms of cadences and 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 13. 

words of Scripture flowing eloquently in his powerful civic 

sermons.  As you listen to that remarkable voice, intoning the 

words of the prophet Amos, let justice roll down like a mighty 

river.  Close your eyes and utter Amen brother, Amen.  King 

certainly worked to bring theological beliefs into political 

imperatives.  Indeed we could ask the African American 

community and my distinguished colleague, Professor Roboteau 

will say more, are you too damn religious?  For that community 

has a long history of bringing religion into civic life.  Or, you could 

consult Dorothy Day of this city.  It was awfully damned religious 

of her to organize tax revolts and protest marches against all 

manner of injustice as she understood the public implications of 

her faith.  Or Monsignor John Ryan, Father New Deal as he was 

called.  And adviser to FDR who brought Catholic social teaching 

to questions of economic justice.  And how about that FDR?  Goes 

on the radio and offers a prayer on D Day, broadcast to all of 

America, to the world and to our soldiers on both fronts.  

Presumably we are not to have any more of that thing, kind of 

thing.  We could ask pro life citizens today, many of whom are 

called by their faith to oppose abortion and to challenge what 

they take to be the abuse of state authority to sanction through 

law, a harrowing practice.  I'm assuming most in this room don't 

agree with their position, but in their protest, I would remind you 

that they remind us of what free speech and free exercise of 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 14. 

religion is all about.  Do we really want to put ourselves in the 

position of authorizing busybodies to say to our preachers and 

politicians and citizens at every turn you've crossed the line?  

You're now too damned religious.  You're bringing your faith in 

everywhere and now keeping it safely contained.  Tusk tusk.  Now 

we will be likely to hear certain things from our opponents.  We 

may be treated to a rogue's gallery, a line up of religious suspects.  

Guilty as charged.  Fanatics out to steal our liberties and 

endanger the republic thereby.  As I read these sorts of accounts 

I'm stunned that America has survived.  We will be told that it is 

only the hyper vigilance of those determined to snuff out too 

damn much religion that has spared us.  But the view that we are 

too damned religious does not pass critical muster.  I'm a 

professor and tempted to be professorial by citing distinguished 

scholars on church and state, who point out that it is the 

vigilance of religious citizens to over-extension of state power 

determined to quash the too damned religious that has over the 

years, protected the freedoms of us all.  Free exercise.  Freedom of 

speech.  Freedom of assembly.  They haven't done this alone of 

course but please, I beg you, at this late date don't engage in the 

shallow exercise of pitting the non-religious who support civil 

liberties against those with religious commitments who allegedly 

do not.  It flies in the face of the facts.  And while we're at it, let's 

not traffic in the tedious pitting of faith against reason that we 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 15. 

hear so frequently.  In the long history of Christianity as you 

heard from from Reverend Lynn, America's dominant faith 

tradition, the great theologians for centuries explored the 

entanglement of faith and reason. In my class yesterday at the 

University of Chicago we discussed Thomas Aquinas with his 

relentless emphasis on human reason and his definition of 

human beings as rational, mortal creatures.  Of course you will 

find some who downgraded reason in the overall scheme of 

things.  But you would be hard pressed to find a great theologian 

who understood faith as nothing but a leap into irrationality.  

Rather, the challenge was to ask how faith and reason worked 

together.  How we could bring faith and reason to issues of our 

time.  Rather than to assume that they were polar opposites.  As 

to criminal activity, whether committed by the religious or non-

religious, ladies and gentlemen we have remedies in law.  We are 

not helpless when confronted by fanatics who commit crimes 

from whichever direction they come.  The problem is that to our 

opponents, the fanatics tend to come from one direction only.  Are 

we to compare terrible persons and happenings?  I dare say that 

in the twentieth century the anti-religious who thought all 

religion was damned religion would win hands down.  Who can 

forget that electric moment at the trial of the Nazi war criminal, 

Adolph Eichmann, when he refused to take an oath on the Bible.  

He was part of the Nazi inner circle.  He would not touch his 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 16. 

hand to this book.  The story of those despised Israelites and the 

Christians who effeminized people as the Nazis put it all the time, 

by trying to keep the strong from destroying the weak which is 

precisely what they were all about.  Now in the history of our 

republic, confessional pluralism and social and political pluralism 

go hand in hand.  If you think we're too damn religious, you're 

likely to think we're too damn pluralistic.  One of the glories of 

this country has turned into a liability and a danger thereby.  The 

great French observer of the American democracy, Alexis 

DeTocqueville, noticed something new under the political sun 

when he toured these United States. He took account of the way 

that religious conviction and associational energy and 

enthusiasm went hand in hand, helping to create a unique, 

robust, civil society.  True then, 1830 – true now [OVERLAPPING 

VOICES]  

 PETER STEINFELS 
One -   

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN  
As my distinguished colleague, Professor Galston will point out.  

Ladies and gentlemen, this is New York City.  I know you are a 

tough crowd.  [LAUGHTER] I would ask you to listen to the voice 

of reason from our side.  That understands that one should not, 

from any direction, separate America's citizens who accept a 

secular world from those, the religious, who allegedly do not.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 17. 

Citizens of religious commitment are among the most 

enthusiastic supporters of a secular government.  They don't 

want established religion but they also understand that to 

support a secular government and state does not commit us to a 

thoroughly secularized society, shorn of religious voices, symbols, 

activities and commitments.  We would be a greatly impoverished 

country were this to come to pass.  So too damn religious?  Nope.  

Just pretty damn American.  [APPLAUSE]    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you very much Jean Elshtain.  And now speaking for 

tonight's motion, Alan Wolfe.   

 ALAN WOLFE  
This doesn't [INAUDIBLE].  [CHUCKLES] If the proposition before 

us tonight was the proposition are Americans too damned 

religious, I would answer no.  In fact I'd be on that side of the 

table.  Um Americans it seems to me, could very well be much 

more religious than they actually are.  If Americans were more 

religious, I believe, we would have much more social justice in 

this country.  We would have much more of an active welfare 

state in this country.  One of the reasons why European societies 

have their welfare states, with such extensive social provisions for 

children and for the elderly and for the helpless, is because 

they've had Christian Democratic parties that have relied on 

Christian social teachings to create a society much more caring 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 18. 

than our own.  If Americans were much more religious there 

would have been much more pretest against the revelations of 

torture at Abu Ghraib and other aspects of our foreign policy.  For 

someone to be tortured and hung up like he was being crucifixed 

would be so unacceptable if Americans were more religious that 

there would have been massive protests.  Not only against the 

tactics, the illegal torture tactics used by the Bush administration 

but by the whole war in Iraq would have, which would have 

violated the social teachings of the single most, largest Christian 

denomination in the United States, the Catholic church.  If 

Americans were more religious they would listen more to the Pope 

and his opposition to the war.  If Americans were more religious 

however, if Americans were more religious, America would be 

much less religious.  Our proposition is whether America is too 

religious and on that question I'm on this side of the fence.  

Because there's a difference between Americans as individuals 

and America as a public space and a public society.  Now I want 

to offer [APPLAUSE]  I want to offer this proposition as the basis 

of my remarks.  If Americans were more damned religious as 

opposed to America, the single greatest benefit would be that 

George W. Bush would never have been elected President of the 

United States.  [APPLAUSE] Why do I say that?  Because I believe 

that the face of the Republican Party, sometimes called the 

Christian right is much more a political movement than it is a 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 19. 

religious movement.  And that it has violated the spirit of what it 

means to be religious in American life and in particular it’s 

violated the spirit of its own religious tradition.  I'm fascinated by 

one historical figure who I believe to be the single most important 

American never to have had a full length biography written of 

him.  His name was John Leland.  He was a Baptist minister and 

itinerant preacher in the early 19th century.  Uh he wrote in his 

memoirs, he said I’ve preached in four hundred and thirty six 

meeting houses, thirty seven courthouses, several capitals, many 

academies and school house.  Barns, tobacco houses, dwelling 

houses and so on.  He estimated that he converted sixteen 

hundred people to Jesus Christ and he praised Jesus Christ as 

his savior.  We owe to John Leland, the First Amendment to the 

United States Constitution.  It was John Leland who engaged in a 

bargain with James Madison in Virginia that Leland would 

support Madison as a delegate to the convention that ratified the 

US Constitution if Madison would drop his previous opposition to 

a Bill of Rights and support one.  James Leland uh John Leland 

was a Baptist.  The Baptists in America under the guise and 

leadership of people like Roger Williams had been uh uh very, 

very passionate and devoted advocates of religious liberty in the 

United States.  All that changed in the 1980s.  It changed in the 

1980s when John Leland's heirs, the Southern Baptist 

Convention, dropped its long history of commitment to religious 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 20. 

liberty to move in a more theocratic direction for explicitly 

political reasons.  I'm sure that almost no one in this room knows 

that in 1973 when the United States Supreme Court handed 

down its decision in Roe v Wade, the decision that presumably 

started the American culture war, the Southern Baptist 

Convention was fully in support of Roe v Wade.  Baptists 

distrusted the state.  They distrusted state intervention.  If a state 

could tell a woman what she could do with her body, it could tell 

a believer what he or she could do with his or her mind.  By 

1980s the Southern Baptist Convention had completely changed 

its position.  Repudiated its earlier support and become the major 

force besides the Catholic Church in America, to overturn Roe v 

Wade.  Now I submit that between 1973 and 1983, God did not 

change his mind on the question of abortion.  But Baptists did.  

Why did they change their mind?  They changed their minds in 

part because they believed that America had become too decadent 

a society.  But they also changed their minds because they saw 

an opportunity.  The Reagan presidency.  The opportunity to 

exercise political power in America.  And they opted for political 

power and it was the direct result of this change in the Southern 

Baptist Convention.   Our largest Protestant denomination that 

created the southern Republican Party and that eventually 

resulted in the election of George W. Bush with the enthusiastic 

support of people associated with the Southern Baptist 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 21. 

Convention.  In a democratic society, all the more power to them.  

They don't like Roe v Wade, all the more power to them.  Organize 

politically.  Elect your candidates, change the law.  Get new 

people on the Supreme Court.  I am second to none in my 

admiration for their political success.  I don't agree with them, I'm 

on the other side.  But you, I cannot take away the brilliance of 

their political tactics or the brilliance of the Bush administration 

in using and relying on that base.  But to think that this has 

anything whatsoever to do with matters of the spirit, matters of 

the heart or matters of one's relationship to a supreme being 

strikes me as far too great a stretch.  I do not know George W 

Bush.  I do know Bill and Hillary Clinton.  I have no idea whether 

George W Bush in his own heart is a religious man.  But in his 

public persona, he is the least religious President I could ever 

imagine.  A man without a shred of doubt about the wisdom of 

his policies.  A man without a shred of humility and modesty as 

he faces the difficult challenges brought on, I must say, by his 

own incompetence.  [CHUCKLES]  A man filled with public piety 

but without a conscience.  If one could ever imagine, ever imagine 

George W Bush sitting around with his advisors and thinking 

about what he's gonna do and Karl Rove comes in and says I 

know what you gotta do you gotta do this, could you ever imagine 

George W Bush saying – Karl that's a great idea but I'm sorry, I'm 

a Christian.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 22. 

 PETER STEINFELS 
One -   

 ALAN WOLFE  
The most important word in Christian theology is the word no.  

There are things that I cannot do because my conscience will not 

allow it.  It's inconceivable to me that that could ever happen.  

Precisely because the Republican Party has been so successfully 

political, politically it is incumbent upon people who oppose them 

to expose their use of religion for political purposes.  To protect 

religion in America against those, the single greatest abusers of 

religion in America uh the Republican Party, the Christian 

conservatives and other people who are degrading everything 

meaningful, serious and spiritual in the tradition that they claim 

to represent.  [APPLAUSE]    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you.  Thank you very much Alan Wolfe.  The next speaker, 

speaking against the motion will be Albert Raboteau. [APPLAUSE]   

 ALBERT RABOTEAU  
Good evening.  Week after next, Christians, the largest religious 

group in the nation will begin the season of Lent.  A period of 

prayer and fasting in preparation for Easter. The holiest feast of 

the Christian year.  In that context I recall the voice of Isiah 

speaking in the name of the Lord.  Is not this the fast that I 

choose to loose the bonds of injustice?  To undo the thongs of the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 23. 

yolk.  To let the oppressed go free and to break every yolk.  Is it 

not to share your bread with the hungry and bring the homeless 

poor into your house?  When you see the naked, to cover them. 

And not to hide your self from your own flesh and blood.  In a 

land of super-abundance and obscene excess, a land of economic 

inequality and serious levels of intransigent poverty and 

homelessness, can we hear the voice of Isiah and really claim that 

we in our nation are too religious?  When we tally up our church 

attending statistics, and the large number of Americans who 

believe in God, do we remember the words of Amos, again 

speaking in the name of the Lord. I hate, I despise your festivals 

and I take no delight in your solemn assemblies.  But let justice 

roll down like the waters and righteousness like a mighty stream.  

By Amos' standard of justice enacted equitably for rich and poor 

alike, can we really claim that we are too religious?  Mired down 

in a preemptive war that has cost thousands upon thousands of 

lives with no end in sight.  Can we listen to the prophecy of 

Micah,  they shall beat their swords into plough shares and their 

spears into pruning hooks.  A nation shall not lift up sword 

against nation.  Neither shall they study war anymore.  Can we 

listen to these words without a pang of remorse that our efforts to 

build peace and have been so feeble and so ineffectual.  Do we 

observe the commandments delivered in the sermon on the 

mount.  Do not resist evil-doers.  If anyone strikes you on the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 24. 

right cheek, turn the other also.  Love your enemies and pray for 

those who persecute you.  No one can serve two masters, you 

cannot serve God and Mammon.  Do not worry about your life, 

what you will eat or what you will drink or what you will wear.  

Do not judge, lest you be judged.  Do unto others as you would 

have them do unto you.  Be perfect as your heavenly father is 

perfect.  Do we obey the singular new commandment proclaimed 

in John's gospel?  Love one another as I have loved you. By this 

shall all know that you are my disciples by how you love another.  

A love in action, not just words.  Feed the hungry.  Give drink to 

the thirsty. Welcome the stranger.  Clothe the naked.  Tend to the 

sick.  Visit those in prison.  For when you do these things to the 

least among you, you do them to Christ.  The prophetic strain in 

the Hebrew and Christian Scriptures has down through the ages 

constantly challenged religious communities to focus on the one 

thing necessary.  What the prophets articulate in word and 

gesture and in the case of Christ literally in body according to 

Christian belief, is the divine pathos, to use Abraham Joshua 

Heschel's wonderful term.  God's compassionate concern for the 

plight of human kind.  Especially for the weak, the outcast, the 

widow, the sojourner.  The prophet experiences the divine pathos 

as a fire in the bones, compelling him or her to speak and act.  In 

twentieth century America an amazing network of religious 

activists carried on this prophetic tradition.  Dorothy Day, co-

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 25. 

founder of the Catholic Worker Movement, established houses of 

hospitality to feed, clothe and shelter the indigent.  Based on the 

belief in our personal responsibility to live in solidarity with the 

poor.  AJ Musty, non-violent agitator and labor organizer, 

longtime director of the Fellowship of Reconciliation taught that 

suffering in the cause of justice releases God's presence into the 

stream of human history.  Abraham Joshua Heschel applied the 

concept of divine pathos to the modern struggle for social justice.  

As he marched with King from Selma to Montgomery and 

organized active protests against the Vietnam War.  Howard 

Thurman, preacher, ecumenist and mystic, co-pastored the first 

interracial and inter-faith congregation in the nation.  And spent 

a lifetime teaching that the search for community is part of the 

very structure of our being.  Thomas Merton, Catholic 

contemplative monk wrote compellingly about the necessity of 

solitude, silence and simplicity for discovering our true selves, 

beyond the false persona fed by the consumerism of our mass 

society.  Martin Luther King Junior deeply rooted in the black 

religious tradition of suffering Christianity arising out of slavery, 

confronted racial and economic inequality and argued that we 

have to transform America from a thing oriented to a person 

oriented society, lest we succumb to the giant triplets of racism, 

materialism and militarism that continue to afflict us.  If we heed 

the voices of these modern prophets and their ancient 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 26. 

predecessors, we won't conclude that Americans or America are 

too religious.  If we take heed we will see how often we preach 

religion while practicing consumerist, conspicuous consumption.  

How often we turn piety into another form of ego gratification.  

Useful for comforting the comfortable and empowering the 

powerful.  We will see how easy and seductive it has always been 

to blunt the prophetic drive of religion to radically change our 

lives and our society.  We will see that we are not nearly religious 

enough.  [APPLAUSE]    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you very much Albert Raboteau.  And now speaking for the 

motion, Susan Jacoby.  [APPLAUSE]    

 SUSAN JACOBY  
I am not an ordained minister or a rabbi.  So it seems I am here 

to speak to you tonight in the role of the atheist in the room.  

[LAUGHTER] [APPLAUSE] Since these are Oxford rules I'm just 

going to pretend this is the Oxford Union and say that America is 

too bloody religious.  Now the case for God's country is being 

made in great Biblical language and the scholarly language of 

Princeton, the University of Chicago and soon to come that might 

fortress of religion, the Brookings Institution.  [LAUGHTER] Uh 

but ladies and gentlemen let us step down from the ivory tower 

and the church steeple into what one of President Bush's advisors 

famously called the reality based world.  Down here in the reality 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 27. 

based world, we must first talk about the retrograde form of 

religion that holds one third of Americans in thrall.  This is the 

proportion of Americans who say that they believe every word in 

the Bible is literally true.  Not merely inspired by God but the 

literal handwriting of God.  One out of three.  What an 

astounding statistic.  Reflecting a level of credulity that exists 

nowhere else in the developed world.  The widespread persistence 

of such an anti-diluvian form of faith is a true affliction in 

American society and demonstrates alas, that the liberty of 

conscience guaranteed by our Constitution also leaves us the 

liberty to bind ourselves with the chains of unreason.  Our 

opponents would have you believe that those of us who consider 

America too bloody religious are concerned mainly with legalistic 

issues involving the separation of church and state.  In fact our 

nation's excessive religiosity affects individual lives and public 

policy in ways that are often matters of life and death.  I could 

offer two hours worth of examples or eight hours but mindful of 

the clock, here are just two.  First, consider that the United 

States is the only country in the Western world with the death 

penalty.  Every study of this issue has shown that pro death 

penalty views correlate closely with biblically based religious 

beliefs.  Justice Antonin Scalia, a Roman Catholic so far to the 

right that he is at odds with his own church on the issue, more 

Catholic than the Pope you might say – believes that since all 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 28. 

legitimate governmental power is derived from God and God has 

the power of life and death, so too must governments.  In a 2002 

speech Scalia quoted Paul's famous epistle to the Romans about 

government heads being duly designated ministers of God to 

avenge evil.  Then Scalia noted nostalgically and I quote – “few 

doubted the morality of the death penalty in an age that believed 

in the divine right of kings.”  Well yes those were surely the good 

old days.  [LAUGHTER] And doesn't it say something about our 

excessive respect for religion in America that this is considered a 

perfectly respectable position.  Scalia, after all, is a Supreme 

Court justice but I can assure you can find his sentiments in less 

elevated English on every crack pot right wing web site.  Let us 

consider another very different example.  The United States has 

the highest rate of teen pregnancy and one of the highest rates of 

sexually transmitted diseases among teenagers again in the 

developed world, why?  Not because American teenagers are more 

sexually active than any other but because conservative religious 

believers have blocked sensible sex education programs and have 

made it as difficult as possible for teenagers to obtain 

contraceptives.  Just recently, we learned that the man in charge 

of the only federal birth control program for the poor, one Dr. Eric 

Keroack spends much of his time appearing at religiously 

sponsored abstinence conferences, where he promotes the notion 

that premarital sex ruins your chances for lasting marriage 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 29. 

because too much sex makes you lose too much oxytocin.  The 

hormone of pleasurable intimacy released with every orgasm.  

[LAUGHTER] Too many orgasms and there go your precious 

bodily fluids for the rest of your life.  [LAUGHTER] It seems that 

Dr. Keroack is a disciple not of the Lord, but of General Jack D. 

Ripper from the movie Doctor Strangelove.  [LAUGHTER] Uh this 

would be funny if our tax dollars were not paying this lunatic to 

peddle his nutty combination of right wing faith and junk science.  

Now – [APPLAUSE].   What of the majority of Americans who are 

the kind of religious believers who have made room for secular 

knowledge in their house of faith.  Martin Luther King has been 

very much on my mind recently too.  Because it’s been forty years 

since he made his courageous speech denouncing the Vietnam 

War at the Riverside Church.  Some of you were probably there.  

The most important points to be made here are that Dr. King, 

both on civil rights and the war, was speaking truth to power 

from outside the government.   And he was speaking to a morality 

that transcended every religion and was in direct opposition to 

the religious beliefs of many Americans at the time.  It is utterly 

nauseating to hear representatives of the religious right today, 

cloak themselves in Dr. King's mantle when their spiritual 

ancestors were standing in the school house door and waving 

Bibles in support of segregation.  [APPLAUSE]  So if you're going 

to talk about religion and all the good it can do in society, you 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 30. 

also have to talk about religion and all the bad it can do and not 

pretend that bad religion is somewhere out there and has nothing 

to do at all with good religion.  Our opponents suggest that 

reasonable religion does have nothing to do with extremist 

religion.  But there are a great many more people of unreasonable 

faith in this country than sophisticated experts on theology would 

like to believe.  And would like you to believe.  Barry Lynn has 

mentioned attempts to inject intelligent design in our schools.  

But that's just the tip of the iceberg.  On October 30th, 2005, the 

Pew Forum on Religion in Public Life released the results of an 

opinion poll that was ignored in the press because Hurricane 

Katrina had slammed into the Gulf Coast the day before.  Among 

the findings, two thirds of Americans want both evolution and 

creationism to be taught in public schools.  Fewer than half of 

Americans accept any form of evolution, including evolution 

guided by God by the way.  Finally, an astonishing forty two 

percent say that all living beings have existed in their present 

form since the beginning of time.  These religiously based beliefs 

are an intellectual disaster for our country.  Americans of all 

faiths have confused the freedom of religion in our Constitution, 

which allows people to believe whatever they want, with the 

respect for the beliefs themselves.  Last fall in a lecture at a 

church affiliated college in the South, I said that I do not respect 

the belief that the universe was created in seven days.  Even 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 31. 

though of course I respect any one's right to believe that. A very 

polite young woman came up to me afterward and said that she 

was an evangelical Christian and was personally insulted by my 

saying that I didn't respect her beliefs about Creation.  I asked 

her if she genuinely respected [OVERLAPPING VOICES]  

 PETER STEINFELS 
One -   

 SUSAN JACOBY  
--my atheism and she admitted that she didn't.  But she said she 

did feel sorry for me.  She also told me she wanted to be a high 

school teacher because she, but she wasn't going to become one 

because she was sure she would prevented from bearing witness 

to her faith.  I suggested that she wait and indulge in some free 

inquiry before she made such a decision at age eighteen.  I can't 

do that she said.  With the accent on can't.  There's no better idea 

than the truth.  This was a young mind in faith based chains in 

the 21st century in a nation whose Constitution was written by 

men of the Enlightenment.  It is this young woman and millions 

of young women and men like her who represented the tragedy of 

Americans overly deferential toward religion.  What we need in 

this country is not more faith of any kind but a new age of 

reason.  Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]    

 PETER STEINFELS  
 Thank you very much Susan Jacoby.  And now the final speaker 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 32. 

against the, tonight's motion will be William Galston.  

[APPLAUSE]   
 WILLIAM GALSTON  

The topic before us is one that stirs understandable passions.  

And as if the topic weren't enough uh our worthy opponents are 

doing their best to pour gas on the flames.  [LAUGHTER] But I'd 

like to proceed somewhat differently.  Uh I'd like to appeal if I may 

to your reason.  To your fair mindedness and to your sense of our 

shared national history not the myopia of the moment.  Let me 

tell you what this debate is not about.  It's not about whether you 

have to be religious to be a good American.  Of course you don't.  

Nor it is about whether you approve of the way that the most 

intense elements of the Republican coalition speaking in the 

name of religion, have conducted themselves.  As a lifelong 

activist Democrat I sure don't.  Neither do most Americans and 

obviously neither do you.  Nor finally is it about whether religion 

in America is without excess or without sin.  Of course it isn't for 

the simple reason it is a human institution.  Here I believe is the 

real question.   If you believe America is too religious, you must 

believe that we'd be a better country if we were less religious or 

maybe not religious at all.  That's the proposition I'd like to 

contest.  Now, admittedly this isn't an easy argument or inquiry 

to conduct.  It's rather like asking whether Bedford Falls would 

have been better or a better place without George Bailey.  Well 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 33. 

quite obviously I'm no angel and I'm certainly not Frank Capra 

but I'm gonna do my best to persuade you.  Invoking your reason, 

your fair mindedness and your sense of history, that America is 

better off with the religion it has with all its flaws than without it.  

I want to make three simple point, points.  First of all, from the 

very beginning of our history, religious Americans have been at 

the forefront of most if not all of the turning points in our history.  

Consider the Revolutionary War, where for ten years prior to our 

Declaration of Independence, Protestant ministers from the 

pulpit, were teaching the lessons of liberty.  And so when Thomas 

Jefferson came to draft the Declaration of Independence, he didn't 

have to make up a new theory.  He only had to do what he said 

he did years later in a letter to a friend, to state the plain common 

sense of the American mind.  Or consider the anti-slavery 

movement.  First in England and then in the United States, 

religious Americans were in the lead.  After the Civil War with the 

rise of industrial capitalist, the teachers of the social gospel 

spearheaded progressive reform.  They were at the forefront of 

concern for immigrants and for the poor.   As Professor Elshtain 

has already pointed out.  In the 1920s the Catholic church 

engaged with organized labor and its leading intellectuals and 

theologians set the stage for the New Deal.  In the 1950s and 

1960s, the civil rights movement of course.  Uh but the anti-war 

movement, the anti-Vietnam war movement was fueled and 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 34. 

sustained among other things by religious passions.  Today, 

movements to fight AIDS, famine and genocide are led by 

Americans of faith.  Last year I had the privilege of attending a 

rally on the Washington Mall against our government's inaction 

in Darfur.  And I can tell you if you took the religious people out 

of that crowd, there would hardly have been anyone left.  Here’s 

my second point.  [APPLAUSE]   Religious Americans are among 

our most engaged citizens today and their engagement 

strengthens our community.  I'm not gonna deluge you with 

statistics.  But I can tell you this – religious Americans are far 

more likely than non-religious Americans to give to charitable 

causes and that includes non-religious causes.  Religious 

Americans are far more likely to volunteer than are non-religious 

Americans and that includes for non-religious causes.  Religious 

Americans are far more likely to participate in our nation's 

politics.  To follow it closely.  To attend political meetings.  To join 

local reform groups.  To contact elected officials and even to vote 

than are non-religious Americans.  And all of these 

generalizations hold true after one corrects for income, marital 

status and all the other variables that social scientists like to play 

with.  Here's my third point – religious Americans, unlike what 

you have heard from our worthy opponents are not, repeat not a 

threat to our liberties.  An overwhelming majority of religious 

Americans practice what one eminent scholar has termed a 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 35. 

private faith.  It is private rather than public.  Tolerant and 

inclusive, moderate than extreme and above all, non-judgmental.  

These are not simple social science abstractions.  If you don't 

believe me, look at the Terry Schiavo affair.  Strident voices in the 

Republican base said go for it.  The Republican Congressional 

leaders went for it.  President Bush even flew back from 

Crawford, interrupting for one of the few times in his Presidency a 

vacation.  [LAUGHTER] And then what happened?  These folks 

were stunned to find that they had a genuine public revolt on 

their hands.  Including a revolt of a majority of religious 

Americans who considered what the government was doing 

meddling and intrusive, a violation of family privacy and abuse of 

law to limit our personal freedoms.  And so my friends, to sum 

up, religious Americans have been at the forefront of progressive 

change throughout our history.  They strengthen our society and 

our politics today and they do not strengthen – they do not 

threaten, indeed they reinforce our tradition of liberty.   

 PETER STEINFELS 
One -   

 WILLIAM GALSTON  
Now, if you've followed me on this journey I'll hope, I hope you'll 

agree that just as George Bailey in normal, ennobled Bedford 

Falls – so religious Americans with all their flaws have ennobled 

our country.  But my guess is that many of you remain 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 36. 

unconvinced.  What about the shrill voices, the calls for a 

Christian America?  Jerry Falwell's lunatic rantings?  Well of this 

and more is true.  But every movement, secular and religious has 

its extremists.  Those with tunnel vision and an absolute 

conviction of their own rectitude who will brook no compromise.   

Let me ask you – who among you would wish to be judged in 

accordance with the most extreme version of the faith or beliefs 

you profess?  To judge fairly you must look at the full picture, not 

the fringe.  And if you do, I'm confident that you will conclude 

that America is not too damm religious after all.  [APPLAUSE]    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you very much William Galston.  We've now completed the 

first portion of the evening's debate.  And at this point I'd like to 

announce the results of the pre-debate vote.  Before the debate 

sixty seven point forty six percent of you – I like that uh second 

decimal uh refinement there [LAUGHTER] – sixty seven point 

forty six percent of you voted for the motion.  Uh twenty four 

point four oh percent of you voted against the motion.  And eight 

point one four percent of you were in the category of don't know.  

We're now ready to begin the question and answer portion of this 

evening's debate.  I will call on the questioners.   Someone on 

each side of the auditorium will come to you with a microphone.  

Please stand when you ask your question.  I would ask that first 

you do not start to ask your question until you have the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 37. 

microphone.  Secondly and obviously importantly uh please make 

your questions short and to the point.  If any questions come 

from members of the press, they should identify themselves as 

such.  And finally members of the audience have the option to 

identify themselves or such – or not if they, depending on which 

they choose to do.   So if we could have a first question.   

  MALE QUESTIONER 
Thank you – am I – the one – I'm sorry they gave me the mic so I 

thought I was [OVERLAPPING VOICES]   

 PETER STEINFELS  
I can't see – over here yes.   

  MALE QUESTIONER  
Thank you.  Thank you all the panelists for your excellent talks.  

My name is Jerry Orstrom.  I'd like to ask the panelists opposed 

the motion uh their views on the teaching of intelligent design in 

the schools as an alternative to evolution.   

 PETER STEINFELS  
Uh would any of the panelists volunteer to do that or shall I toss 

the question at one or the other of you or toss it over to the other 

folks to answer for the panelists who are against.    

 WILLIAM GALSTON 
Well I speak as the son of the Sterling Professor of Biology 

Emeritus at Yale University.  [LAUGHTER] Uh so I think you can 

probably guess what I believe about the matter at hand.  Uh 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 38. 

having said that uh John Stewart Mills said something that stuck 

with me ever, ever since the first time I read it as an 

undergraduate.  He who knows only his own side of the case 

doesn't even know that.  Uh and I am I am fascin – I was 

fascinated to read a review of a biography of, of the uh you know 

the English botanist, Alfred Russel Wallace.   You know who was 

a contemporary of Darwin and some believe anticipated him and 

how Wallace struggled with the question of the relationship 

between evolution and design.  You know what, I think our 

students might be better off if they knew something about that 

controversy.  I'm not saying I'm in favor of the kinds of curricula 

that the extremists are pushing but if you're asking me in 

principle, would it be good for our students to know that there is 

a history of debate on these issue, this issue, and people who are 

by no means manifestly foolish have taken various points of view.  

No I don't think they would be worse off.    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Uh Barry Lynn did you want to respond to that.     

 BARRY W. LYNN 
Um Bill I think this is a good example of what we're talking about 

tonight.  The truth is that in two major recent studies, high 

school biology teachers said that they spent quote little or no time 

discussing evolution.  Why do they do that?  Because they are 

afraid of stirring up community distaste for what they're doing in 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 39. 

those public schools.  So in a world, in some other alternate 

universe where we would have the time to spend enormous 

amounts of time talking about evolution and then perhaps 

discussing this controversy, you might be making a very 

important point.  But we are now facing a dumbing down of 

science so terrible in this country that biology teachers, without 

any statutes or passage of any goofy resolutions from school 

boards, are simply afraid to teach the truth.  The scientific truth 

as they know it to be true.  They don't doubt it but they're afraid 

to teach it.  And that's the climate of religious intolerance.  Of 

religious efforts to move city councils, state legislatures, state 

boards of educations in the direction of Biblical literalism instead 

of scientific truth.  Without even understanding that there's a 

difference between the two disciplines.  That's the real world that 

Susan was talking about.  That's what we find when we litigate 

these cases as we did with the ACLU of Pennsylvania up in Dover, 

Pennsylvania.  

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
I have to say I'm a little tired of this real world, illusory world 

distinction.  Um as those of us over here somehow living in um I 

think you said an alternative universe where in fact certain kinds 

of discussions can go forward.  And and be had and it's to the 

benefit of everyone.  That's simply not the case.  I think that we 

understand very well the kinds of pressures that can be brought 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 40. 

to bear given the way America has organized its schools we've 

never had total monolithic control of the schools.  We have school 

districts with a lot of independence.  That means you're going to 

get variety from place to place.  If this process of dumbing down 

were as systematic as Mr. Lynn suggests it makes our continuing 

astonishing uh sort of scientific progress and the fact that people 

come from all over the world to study science here, a bit 

perplexing.  Uh now having said that let me just indicate that if 

you look at the kinds of text books that are used, which I did but 

maybe I was doing that in an alternate universe that are used to 

teach science in our high schools and are the most widely 

adopted text books, you see that evolution in fact is covered and 

that it is something that is addressed.  But it is also important 

not to become, it seems to me, if we're worried about 

fundamentalism uh there is a kind of Darwinian fundamentalism 

that in fact will brook no debate and no opposition.  And the 

truth of the matter is, if you know anything about this field at all 

is that there's a tremendous amount of debate internal to it.  And 

a lot of, and scientists who are uh see themselves as evolutionists 

who strenuously reject Darwin's classical theory and so forth.  So 

I think students can handle these kinds of debates, both within 

science and between the scientists and those with an alternate 

account.  Although I should say that a lot of the intelligent design 

people including a very distinguished scientist named Sir John 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 41. 

Polkinghorne do support some notion of intelligent design.  So it's 

not just a bunch of whackos out there who want to dumb 

everything down, who think this debate should go forward.    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Well we'll have Al and then Susan.   

 ALBERT RABOTEAU 
OK this is tangential as I think most of my comments are tonight 

to some of the debate but if we're talking about the real world I 

think what really concerns me is not whether the, this debate 

about intelligent design and Darwinism, that has some 

importance, what concerns me is the corporate presence in our 

schools in which students are eating pizza from Pizza Hut and 

Coca Cola from the Coca Cola company.  The rampant disease of 

consumerism.  That is showing its way in terms of unprecedented 

numbers of child obesity in our society.  In the real world what 

bothers me is that the average American child, whatever they 

study in terms of issues of Darwinism or intelligent design 

watches three and a half hours of television a night.  The average 

American adult watches five hours of television a day.   

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
Talk about dumbing down  - that's where it comes from.    

 ALAN WOLFE 
That's twenty one thousand commercials a year.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 42. 

 PETER STEINFELS 
I'm gonna have to ask our, our debaters to be a little bit briefer in 

their responses so we can get to some more questions.  But first 

of all Susan.     

 SUSAN JACOBY 
Yes I would just like to say that Dr. Elshtain's comment is typical 

of this kind of argument.  She is suggesting that there is actually 

debate about evolution versus intelligent design. There is of 

course much debate within the scientific community about many 

of the particulars of evolution.   There is no debate at all in the 

scientific community about intelligent design on the one hand 

versus evolution on the other.  Furthermore, uh, what Dr. 

Galston said, certainly intelligent design would be an interesting 

thing to have in a college course on, on the history of pseudo-

science and religion, that would be good.   But to include it in a 

high school biology class would be to include for example, the 

theory of that—the theory of that vortices were responsible, 

vertexes were responsible for the earth turning on its axis.  That 

is not a debate, it’s putting nonsense in the same classroom with 

science, period.  [APPLAUSE]   

 PETER STEINFELS  
Could—could I have a question from this side of the auditorium, 

please?    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 43. 

 MALE QUESTIONER 
Yeah, hi, thank you very much, Howard Baruch, I’m curious why 

the biggest threat, uh, to us as a society in this country, that 

even gives us the ability to have this conversation, wasn’t touched 

on by either side of the panel.  Uh, where right now in the Middle 

East we have people who wanna fly into our country and destroy 

our country but, you know, but nobody brought this up as a 

threat to our way of society, on both sides of the panel.  And, just 

seemed to be neglected.   

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you.  Uh, we’ll, we’ll have a brief comment on that, the—

the motion was America is, is too damn religious, I think that 

probably accounts for some of the direction of that. But if 

anybody would like to make a brief response to that, uh, point 

obviously on people’s minds.  [PAUSE]  We’ll take another 

question then.    

 FEMALE QUESTIONER 
Oh, thank you.  My name is Susan Harrington, and what I’m a 

little bit concerned about this evening is that the question for me 

is not is—are Americans too religious, that’s of, really of no 

interest to me.  More important to me is is the American 

government too religious.  Are the American schools too religious.  

Is the American Medical Society too religious or affected by 

religion.    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 44. 

 PETER STEINFELS  
Panelists?  Barry Lynn?   

 BARRY W. LYNN 
I—I think, uh, Susan was, uh, addressing that issue as, as Alan 

and I were also that in…our—that our concern is the way in 

which religion has played off government and played off politics in 

these negative ways.   Susan, don’t, don’t tell all of your free-

thinker friends that I’m gonna say this but the fact that Franklin 

Delano Roosevelt said a prayer on D-Day over the radio, I’m not 

too troubled about.  What I am troubled about is George W. Bush 

seems to have a prayer for every day from A-Day to Z-Day 

[LAUGHTER], and he’s happy to share it with us at all times.   His 

ideology, shared by many of those third of Americans who are 

Biblical literalists, has a tremendous negative effect on the way 

we can do science, the very things we can study in medicine and 

science, so while some are coming to America to study, you’re 

right, Jean,  it’s also true that because of our absurd policies for 

example on stem-cell research, we are losing some of the top 

scientists in this country, East and West, to other nations.  

[APPLAUSE]   

 PETER STEINFELS 
Does anyone—Bill?    

 WILLIAM A. GALSTON 
 [LAUGHS]  I really have to protest.  Uh—  [LAUGHTER]  With—

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 45. 

with a smile.  Uh…uh, one of the pieces, one of the pieces of my 

biography, uh, is that I was in the Clinton White House for two 

and a half years as his deputy, uh, deputy director for domestic 

policy.   Uh, I have gone down with the good ship Al Gore, twice.  

[LAUGHTER]  Uh, this—you know…uh, I did not come here, I 

thought, for a debate about George Bush and the Bush 

administration.  Uh—  [APPLAUSE]  I…you know…I yield, I really 

do yield to no one in my opposition to this administration.   But, 

to reason from the follies and excesses of this administration to 

conclusions about America, just strikes me as a syllogism with a 

missing middle—   

 ALAN WOLFE 
Well, may—may I just—   

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
And as well—  [APPLAUSE]   

 WILLIAM A. GALSTON 
I think it was—   

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
And as a well—   

 ALAN WOLFE 
Let me…let me just—   

 PETER STEINFELS  
The mod—the moderator will take charge.  Bill, are you finished 

with your remarks, ‘cause I’d like Alan, who made the distinction 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 46. 

between Americans and America, uh, respond, uh, if, if that’s all 

right and we’ll, we’ll carry on—   

 WILLIAM A. GALSTON 
I think I’ve made my point.    

 ALAN WOLFE 
Um, I’m a great admirer of all your work with [LAUGHS] Al Gore 

and Bill Clinton but, look, I’m the one who brought George W. 

Bush into this debate, and, and, how could you not?  Uh, on, on, 

on this particular subject, it’s, it’s, we have seen, in the last six 

years, uh, a, a, really a—a radical transformation, in the, in my 

opinion the manipulation of a, political-religious, pseudo-religious 

movement, uh, to serve secular ends, but to cover—   I believe to 

serve secular political ends, but to cover it with religious 

language.  Because, it is widely understood in this country given 

its religiosity, that it’s perfectly appropriate to argue about 

politics, but it’s not appropriate to argue about religion, as Susan 

Jacoby said.   Once you say you’re religious then we’re all 

supposed to say, oh, I didn’t know, my goodness, of course I 

respect everything you say.  It is, it seems to me, a violation of 

both the principles of liberal democratic debate, but even more 

importantly a violation of the fundamental Christian idea of 

rendering under Caesar what is Caesar’s, and rendering to God 

what is God’s.   For politicians, George W. Bush and the 

Republican Party to try to, uh, impose undemocratically a radical 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 47. 

agenda on the United States, bad enough.  And then to cover it in 

religious language as a way of immunizing themselves from 

criticism because we all know that this is a particularly thin-

skinned administration that doesn’t want the public to question 

what it does and what a better way to do that than to say, or to 

claim, that when people disagree with them, that’s religious 

bigotry, that’s religious prejudice and so on and so on.  And that’s 

why—   

 PETER STEINFELS 
You know, Alan, Alan was—   

 ALAN WOLFE 
—George W. Bush is the—   

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
There—there—there was a, there was a panel—  [APPLAUSE]  It 

was—there was a panel a couple of years ago at the annual 

meeting of the American Academy of Religion, about 7000 people 

show up to this thing.  And if memory serves, I think Peter 

Steinfels was on that panel.   Um, and it had to do with looking at 

the, uh, religious, explicit religious references and so on in the—

or at least one person did—in the, in the speeches of President 

Clinton, and George Bush.   Uh, or George Bush specifically and 

someone compared it to Clinton and it turned out, uh, that it 

was— that Bill Clinton referenced Scripture more frequently than 

Bush did.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 48. 

 ALAN WOLFE 
Which proves my point—   

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
And, and, and with—and as Bill Galston likes to say, it’s because 

he knows it better.  Um—  But at any rate it’s— the no—the 

notion…  [LAUGHTER]  The notion that, the notion that you 

know, if we—I mean the, the political agenda that seems to be 

going on is because one opposes certain policies,  one therefore 

has to oppose, uh, the fact that those promulgating these policies, 

uh, have strong religious beliefs.  But when you—but if you favor 

the policies, uh, then presumably, the religious references, the 

use of Scripture and so on, is something to, to good ends, and I 

think that, uh, if we wanna blame, uh, Barry Lynn mentioned the 

faith-based initiative, I think, uh, the person responsible’s right 

here.   I mean this was a—this was a Clinton administration 

initiative.  So I think there’s a lot of, of, of strange, uh… there’s a 

lot of history being rewritten here about how these things wok.  

And I also think, Alan, you’re not—and I, then I know I’ve gotta 

stop here.   You’re not giving the American people enough credit 

to sort out the use and abuse of religion in the public sphere.  I 

mean if indeed the Bush administration were so diabolically 

clever as you seem to claim it is, why aren’t his, why aren’t his 

ratings at up at 80 percent?   Uh, his approval ratings, people 

have a capacity to think critically about this, give people some 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 49. 

credit.  

 SUSAN JACOBY 
Uh—I—Peter—oh.  [APPLAUSE]   

 PETER STEINFELS 
One question.  Uh, be brief, please—   

 SUSAN JACOBY 
Uh, I’ll—yeah, I’ll, I’ll—well I will, I’ll, I’ll forget what—I’ll, I’ll stop 

what I was going to say which is this is not a debate about 

Biblical references, I love it when people use Biblical references.  

It’s like, like Barry, I don’t love it when it’s an obligation to con—

con—finish every speech with “God bless America.”   But the 

reason George Bush’s ratings are down, is because you can’t keep 

the reality-based world away forever.  This is—just call this the 

revenge of the reality-based world.  [APPLAUSE]    

 PETER STEINFELS 
I—I—I’d like to, I’d like to throw in a question myself because, uh, 

despite the sparks we’ve seen, uh, in recent moments, uh, I 

detected a distressing amount of agreement underlying, many of 

the debaters’ presentations tonight.   Uh, namely there’s 

agreement about all kinds of bad forms of religion, there certainly 

were not endorsements of certain kinds of use of government and 

legislative fiat, uh, for religious purposes.  But I’m still not certain 

about the question, which in some ways Bill Galston posed.  Uh, 

if the price…of getting rid of the forms of religion that bothers us 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 50. 

or the use of religion in conjunction with state power, or the 

means of getting rid of that, were to make Americans somehow or 

other less religious generally, pray less, read Scripture less, light 

Sabbath candles less, pay less attention to their religious leaders,  

is that the price that we think would be worth paying, and I 

thought Susan answered that to some extent directly in her 

remarks ‘cause, maybe I’m wrong, she seemed to think that that 

would be one way of doing it especially in regard to that one third 

of the country.   

 SUSAN JACOBY 
No—   

 PETER STEINFELS  
But I don’t have other people—I’d like to have other people’s 

responses—    

 SUSAN JACOBY 
But I’d like to—I, I didn’t say—first of all I think that’s—   

 PETER STEINFELS 
Okay—   

 SUSAN JACOBY 
—that’s a false choice.  I don’t think that the—I don’t think that 

the price we pay in, in not letting government be as involved with 

religion as it is in making Americans less religious at all.  Uh, in 

fact, if you look at Europe, Alan mentioned Europe, and, and I 

don’t entirely agree with him about this.   In Europe there is in 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 51. 

fact much more official church-state entanglement than there has 

been here, all—all along.  And yet Europe is indeed much more 

secular than it is here and probably that is the reason.  So I 

cannot imagine why anyone would think that whatever we do 

about church and state will make Americans personally less 

religious.   

 ALAN WOLFE 
Yeah, and, I—I thought it was interesting, important to—   

 SUSAN JACOBY 
And I don’t—not that I, not that I care, I think less religion would 

be better altogether.   

 ALAN WOLFE 
Well, we, we—   

 SUSAN JACOBY 
But I don’t see why it would affect, why it would affect Americans’ 

personal religion.   

 ALAN WOLFE 
I—I was sure this issue would arise, and that’s why I wanted to 

be on this side to point out to the audience that, we on this side 

can disagree with each other, on the question of whether 

Americans are too damn religious, and still completely agree on 

the question of whether America is too damn religious.   That 

distinction just strikes me as enormously important, I am not 

Sam Harris, I am not Richard Dawkins, I am not—I do not object 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 52. 

to religion.  I object to public religion, the use and deliberate 

manipulation of religion.  That it seems to me is the problem, so 

Peter, my answer to your question is, we’re not here to address 

the question you raised.   The question of whether Americans are 

not religious enough or too re—is just not simply on the table.  

It’s not what we’re about.  You wanna have Richard Dawkins 

debate John Polkinghorne [PH] or something like that, then have 

that debate.  But that’s not our debate.  [APPLAUSE]    

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
Um, Alan, public religion, um, refers not just to the people that 

you don’t like misusing religion as you understand it.  It refers 

quite specifically to the kinds of movements and efforts that our 

side has identified.  That precisely involves bringing religion into 

the public square as a form of public religion.   I think that your 

understanding of religion, is, is of a kind of quiet, contemplative 

sort where it’s all about, uh, it’s all about my own, uh, 

orientation.  But as we all know, historically, uh, various religious 

traditions have strong histories of different forms of social 

engagement.  The question is what does that engagement look 

like, what does it involve?  And none of the folks that we talked 

about, none of the efforts we talked about, called for anything 

like, uh, establishing a faith, anything like something like quasi-

establishment, but certainly believe that there had to be this 

strong public witness and public presence.   And I think that’s, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 53. 

that’s part of what—that’s why I said we’re awfully damn 

American, that’s what America historically has very much been 

about, and it’s one of the fruits…and here I think might be the 

one point where I agree with Susan.   Uh…the fruits of free 

exercise.  You precisely have the kind of hollowing-out of the 

religious traditions in Europe because of that history of church-

state, which I think destroys religion over a long time when you’ve 

got established religion.  We don’t have that, we’ve never have 

that.   

 ALAN WOLFE 
But we have people who want it.  That’s the point—   

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
No, no we don’t—   

 ALAN WOLFE 
—I couldn’t agree with you more that—   

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
They don’t want a—they don’t want an established religion, they 

have too strong a stake in free exercise—   

 PETER STEINFELS  
Uh, could I—   

 MAN  
Bill, Bill—   

 ALAN WOLFE 
No, the free exercise for the majority—   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 54. 

 PETER STEINFELS  
Well, here’s—here’s what we’re going to do at this point.  

[LAUGHTER]  I would like actually to take a few more questions 

without getting responses, simply to get the questions, and if 

panelists would like to respond to one or another of them, that 

would be fine.  There’s a question, I—I encourage people to sit in 

the first row so there’s a question right here, there’s a woman 

right here, uh, who’s eager to ask a question.   And then we’ll 

move back to that one and then over here, let’s take, uh, three 

questions quickly…  [PAUSE]  And please be brief with your 

questions too.   

 AUDIENCE MEMBER (female) 
My name is Inga Gittelman [PH] and I have just one question.  

How do you define religious.  You all seem to see something else.  

And in the end you’re all the same.    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you.  Question was, uh, that, that the definition of religion 

was at the, perhaps at the center of this, this debate.    

 MALE QUESTIONER 
Hello, can I, uh, can I just—   

 PETER STEINFELS 
Quest—what’s—   

 MALE QUESTIONER 
I’ve had, I’ve had this for a while, Peter—   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 55. 

 PETER STEINFELS 
All right.    

 MALE QUESTIONER 
Hi, uh, I’m Professor Marufi [PH], I’m also from Fordham 

University.  And I—I have a question, I think, one of the things 

that bothered me a little bit about this discussion, is that religion 

in my mind is a variable, it’s not a constant.  So it’s very hard to 

answer this question.  But the—what that leads me to believe, is 

that, the extent to which people use religion to underwrite ethics 

and morality, has an implication for public policy.   So my 

question to you is, to what extent does the majority have the 

right, because of their religious beliefs, to dictate morality, 

conscience, and ethics, to people who don’t share those beliefs 

who might be in a minority.    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Good, thank you, and one more.    

 MALE QUESTIONER 
Uh, Christopher Rizzari [PH].  My question in this debate has 

always been, where are the main-line churches in this debate, I 

think if you were to go to the Midwest, or even New Jersey, the 

most visible churches [LAUGHTER] that you would see are the big 

mega-corporate churches.   Where are—where’s the 150-year-old 

Episcopalian churches that have had white members who were 

involved in abolition and the civil rights movement, where are 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 56. 

those churches in this debate.    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you very much, I hope that in their remarks, uh, some of 

the—their closing remarks, some of the debaters may in fact, uh, 

take up some of those very good, uh, cle—questions that I’m glad 

we got on the floor and I’d particularly like to thank all the 

audience for making your questions brief.   It’s now time, uh, to 

vote.  Uh, here’s the ticket if you want to vote for the motion… 

you tear off the “For” from the top and slip it into the ballot boxes.  

If you are against the motion tear off and deposit the “Against” 

and if you still don’t know where you stand just put the entire 

ticket in the box.  The ballot boxes will be given to one person…at 

the end of the row and passed along, please pass them quickly to 

your neighbor…  And one of the ushers will then take the box and 

pass it on to the row behind you.  Everyone should get a chance 

to vote…  Please don’t reach over, wait till the ballot box gets to 

yourself.   

[EXTRANEOUS TALK]   

 PETER STEINFELS  
Uh, now, if we could do the rest of the voting, uh, quietly, if we 

could, if we could proceed a little bit more quietly I’d like to start 

with the final remarks from the panelists, beginning with the side 

opposing the motion.  And I’d ask the panelists to please speak, 

uh, from their places.  So first, speaking against the motion, Jean 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 57. 

Bethke Elshtain.   

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
Uh, well, as we have learned this evening, uh, the interaction of 

religion and politics, is a continuing tension.  It’s a dramatic 

story.  Uh, we have our version of it, and you’ve heard a bit of 

that version from our side.  Uh, we’ve heard some,  some rather 

dismissive remarks and some ridicule from the other side.   Uh, 

but I would ask you to reflect on the question of American civil 

society, uh, as you go forward into this evening.  Uh, the fact that 

religious commitment, citizens who are believers, believers who 

are citizens, have been the backbone and the heart of American 

civil society historically, that we would be enormously 

impoverished without their commitment, in almost every area of 

social life.   Now, the notion that somehow, when people bring 

their religious commitments to the public arena that means 

they’re trying to “dictate” their faith to the rest of us.  No, they’re 

doing what citizens do.  They’re trying to persuade you of 

something.   Uh, they’re trying to get you to think about things a 

certain way, they’re trying to get you to vote a certain way.  That’s 

what citizens do.  And we should not impose some kind of penalty 

on those with religious convictions when they bring those 

convictions into public life.   Now one other important point here 

and that is, that religion helps to provide the kind of critical self-

limitation that keeps a political system from dangerous overreach.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 58. 

Um, that is to say, it helps to remind us ongoingly, of the dangers 

of a certain kind of political power, and the attempts to take over 

all areas of social life by saying no, wait a minute.    Uh, we have 

free exercise in this country, certain things cannot be dictated to 

us, and certain kinds of controls cannot be applied, and that’s 

part of the American story too.    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you very much, Jean Elshtain.  Now, uh, with some 

closing remarks, uh, for the motion, Barry Lynn.   

 BARRY W. LYNN 
Uh, I have not given a speech in the last 20 years without 

mentioning one person’s name, so I’ll mention it now.  Uh, on 

Saturday I’m going down to Pat Robertson’s Regent University 

Law School to judge the finals of their moot court competition.  

[LAUGHTER]   So even he and I do chat on occasion.  And I am 

never saying, that people like Pat Robertson, James Dobson, 

Jerry Falwell do not have a right to speak, do not have a right to 

go to the public forum, in which they find, uh, their voices heard.     

I’m just saying that if you speak so unpersuasively that you 

don’t…persuade people to do what you want them to do, then 

don’t you dare go to the government and try to get the 

government to force all of us to live as you would have us.  

[APPLAUSE]   And second, uh, and final point here, it goes to a 

question that was not addressed, yes, terrorists came to America.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 59. 

And we should at some point debate fundamentalism around the 

world.  The truth in the matter in this real world, in every world, 

in this universe, is that when Pope—the late Pope John Paul II 

condemned the invasion of Iraq in the strongest possible words 

used by any modern Pope, and said that the American officials 

who made the decision to invade Iraq would have to answer 

directly to God,  George Bush’s response was to call in a group of 

so-called religious right theologians two days later to come to the 

White House, chat with him, and explain to the press afterwards 

that they were convinced that this was a just war.   I believe that 

if President George Bush had in fact done a little more 

intelligence-gathering, and a little less theological butt-protecting, 

there would be thousands of American families and tens of 

thousands of Iraqi families who would not be visiting their 

children in graveyards.  It does matter.  [APPLAUSE]    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you, thank you very much, Barry Lynn.  And now 

speaking against tonight’s motion, Albert Raboteau.    

 ALBERT J. RABOTEAU 
Um…as I hinted earlier, well, let me, let me do something first, I—

I’d like to express my appreciation to the Rosenberg [sic] 

Foundation and its executive director, Robert Rosenberg, for this 

occasion.  And I’d like to—   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 60. 

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
Rosenkranz.  Rosenkranz.    

 ALBERT J. RABOTEAU 
 I’m sorry…   

 PETER STEINFELS 
Rosen—Rosenkranz.    

 ALBERT J. RABOTEAU 
Rosenkranz, I’m sorry, yeah.  Can’t read my own writing.  Uh, 

thanks also to Dana Wolfe for inviting me to participate in this 

debate and to Vern Calhoun and Kris Kamikawa for the 

arrangements which they handled so graciously.  I’d like to also 

thank my fellow panelists for their thoughtful and cogent 

arguments.   As I said earlier I—I feel somewhat tangential to this 

argument, in part because the argument was about religion, or 

church and state, religion and political culture.  The way in which 

I took the question—and this partly gets at the question of what 

is religion— was, what’s the role of religion in terms of the 

American ethos the spirit of the American people.   Uh, as we all 

know Jefferson changed Locke’s notion of the inalienable rights 

from life, liberty and property, to life, liberty, and the pursuit of 

freedom—of happiness, excuse me, pursuit of happiness.   What I 

see as being part of the ethos of American culture, uh, and the 

American, direction, has been a reversal of that, those inalienable 

rights.  That is we are back to life, liberty, and the pursuit of 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 61. 

property.  Property in terms of rampant consumerism which is 

what I see as the real danger to American culture and spirit 

today.   Now let me close with, um, with three short stories, brief 

vignettes, which have to do I think with the possibility of religion 

consum—continually renewing itself and reminding people who 

are religious or who hear, uh, in some ways religious symbols, 

who aren’t totally tone-deaf to religion.    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Al—Al, your, your two minutes is up, if you can make the stories 

very quick—   

 ALBERT J. RABOTEAU 
Okay, I’ll make them, I’ll make them very, very, very short, I’ll 

make, make it only two.  Uh, the first one has to do with, with 

Abba Serapian[PH].   Abba Serapian, uh, one day was, walking 

down the road.  It’s in the fourth or fifth century.  And, um, he 

gives his cloak to a poor man.   And as he walks on he meets 

another poor man who’s shivering in the cold and gives him his 

tunic.  And then he sat down naked holding the holy gospel.  

Someone came along and asked him, Abba, who has taken your 

clothes.  And he pointed to the gospel book and said, this is the 

robber.   The last quick story, one day Abba Lott went to see Abba 

Joseph and said to him, Abba, as much as I am I, uh, I am 

unable, I practice a small rule, a little fasting, some prayer and 

meditation and remain quiet and as much as possible guard my 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 62. 

thoughts.  What else should I do.   Then the old man stood up 

and stretched his hands towards heaven.  His fingers became like 

ten torches of flame, and he said to him, if you wish, you can 

become all flame.  Now I present those to you as two Zen-like 

koans for your reflection about the abilities of religion to…renew 

itself, to see beyond itself, and to point to something important 

for the human spirit.   

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you, Al Raboteau.  [APPLAUSE]  And now, uh, speaking in 

support of the motion, uh, Susan Jacoby.   

 SUSAN JACOBY 
It’s been suggested that religion creates a check against 

government overreaching.  We wish.  More often than not, it pro—

can also provide an excuse for government overreaching.  For 

overreaching in general in fact.  We’ve heard a great deal in recent 

months about how the only strategy for liberal Democratic 

candidates is to fight fire with fire, by pitting liberal religious 

values against the dominant conservative values of the current 

administration.   I knew that Hillary Clinton was running for 

President two years ago, when for the first— when the first time 

she said, “our Bible,” in those pious, sanctimonious tones.  

[LAUGHTER]  “Our Bible tells us this.”   The problem with this is 

that your Bible may tell you something else altogether, as indeed 

was the case with the Pope on one side and the various minister 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 63. 

hacks Bush got together on the other.  What is the Bible telling—

what, telling those very religious Senators now, as they fiddle and 

manage not to debate while Iraq burns.   I for one would like to 

hear a lot less about theology and a lot more about the personal 

moral courage that has seemed so lacking in our political process.  

[APPLAUSE]  Uh, whoever the gentlemen said, I—I do not believe 

we have to have a civic morality that while for many includes 

religion, has to be based on more than religion.  Too often, 

referencing religion has become not a way to demonstrate 

personal responsibility, but a way to avoid it.  And one final thing, 

It’s a Wonderful Life is a movie.  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank…thank you, Susan Jacoby.  Uh, we’ll now have finally 

speaking against the motion, William Galston.    

 WILLIAM A. GALSTON 
It may be a movie, but it’s a little closer to reality than many of 

the things that Team A has presented us with this evening.  Uh—  

[APPLAUSE]   

 JEAN BETHKE ELSHTAIN 
Hear, hear.    

 WILLIAM A. GALSTON 
I, uh…I certainly, uh, you know…I, I certainly believe, uh, that 

there are dogmatic Biblical literalists, no question about it.  I also 

believe, I think with good factual warrant, that there are dogmatic 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 64. 

atheists.  Quite frankly I don’t see anything to choose between 

them.  In my presentation, I offered three arguments about the 

historical contribution of religion, about the current social and 

political engagement of religious Americans, uh, and third about 

religious Americans as not being a threat to our liberties.  About 

the first of these propositions, apparently there’s no contest.  Uh, 

about the second, apparently no contest, or at least we, we heard 

none.  And as for the third, the only evidence that was put on the 

table, was a parade of horribles which as Professor Elshtain has 

pointed out, have been rejected by the American people 

themselves.   The Terry Schiavo affair is a perfect case in point.  A 

question arose, from the audience, about the rule of—the rule 

and role of law.  Uh, I would remind everyone, that Martin Luther 

King was not simply appealing to conscience.   He was advocating 

for law.  In his judgment, conscience led to law, so the real issue 

is not law and coercion yay or nay, but rather the legitimate 

limits of law and coercion.  I’m a professor of political philosophy, 

I’d be happy to debate that with you for hours on end, but that is 

the question.   Finally, uh… Reverend Lynn referred to Thomas 

Jefferson, this is my peroration, Peter.  Uh, and, quite 

appropriately.  Uh, he was one of our, uh, I would say least 

orthodox founders.  Uh, and we rightly honor him for his, uh, 

intellectual courage.   So let me close with this quotation, from 

Thomas Jefferson.  “Can the liberties of a nation be thought 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 65. 

secure, when we have removed their only firm basis—a conviction 

in the minds of the people that these liberties are the gift of God.”  

Thank you very much.  [APPLAUSE]    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you, William Galston, and now finally, uh, speaking for the 

motion, Alan Wolfe.    

 ALAN WOLFE 
Well, we obviously have our disagreements on this panel, we 

obviously have our disagreements in America, we’re deeply 

divided on some of these questions.  But when we’re attacked, 

when our enemies launch an attack against us, we come 

together, and we unite, and we rely on our armed forces to defend 

us as a people.   At the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, 

Colorado, a publicly-financed institution, designed to defend all 

Americans against their enemies, has been taken over by 

evangelical Christians who use every facility at the Air Force 

Academy in their capacity to proselytize for Jesus Christ.   

Lawsuits have been brought, inquiries have been brought, the 

practices continue.  This is the danger of America being too 

religious.  This is not permissible in our pluralistic, democratic 

society.  Jean Elshtain says, that what religious believers want is 

the right to free exercise.   For a certain kind of religious believer, 

the right to free exercise is the right to proselytize, and the right 

to free exercise is to proselytize in public at public institutions.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 66. 

Our First Amendment forbids the establishment of, of a state 

church, and protects the right to religious freedom.   But for a 

certain kind of religious believer in this country, the right to 

exercise their freedom is constituted by the right to establish 

themselves as the official church in their local community, in 

their university, or in their public institution.   Those are the 

dangers, it seems to me.  This requires that we be extremely 

sensitive to paradox, that we walk fine lines.  Of course we want 

people who are motivated by matters of conscience and by 

matters of faith, to make public their concerns.   Of course, at 

least I believe, our entire political culture is enriched by the 

private consciences and the religious convictions of Americans, I 

knew that on my side of the panel, there would be people who 

would be probably somewhat less sympathetic to people of faith 

than I would be.   But I wanted to use my opportunity to 

demonstrate, that when America becomes too damn religious, it’s 

bad for religion.  It’s bad for people of faith.  It is bad when people 

use faith for what are corrupt, unreligious, and for Christians, 

un-Christian ends, and I hope I’ve been able to persuade you of 

that.  [APPLAUSE]    

 PETER STEINFELS  
Thank you very much, Alan.  Uh, I would in fact like to thank all 

the debaters, and the audience for their very good work this 

evening.  I think we could give them another round of 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 67. 

enthusiastic applause.  [APPLAUSE]  Before announcing the 

results of the audience vote, I want to take care of a few other 

matters.   First, the next Intelligence Squared US debate will take 

place on Wednesday, March 14th, 2007, here at Asia Society and 

Museum.  The motion to be debated is, “Global warming is not a 

crisis.”  [LAUGHTER]  I’m not signing up on that one.  

[LAUGHTER]   The remaining three debates in our spring series, 

including that one, are all sold out.  The good news is however 

that beginning next week, uh, Intelligence Squared US will start 

selling packages on-line and by phone for the fall 2007-spring 

2008 series.  We will be giving priority to full-season subscribers, 

so to avoid disappointment,  you should buy those series 

packages immediately.   In addition, tonight’s debate can be 

heard locally on WNYC-AM 820, on Friday, February 23rd, at 2 

p.m.  Copies of some of our panelists’ books are for sale upstairs 

in the lobby.  You can also purchase DVD’s from previous 

debates, here tonight or from the Intelligence Squared US 

website.   Finally, please be sure to pick up a copy of tomorrow’s 

edition of the Times of London, and the Times Literary 

Supplement, as you leave the auditorium.  And, uh, now I take—

there’s not an envelope to tear open but the results of our debate, 

um…   There seems to have been a slight swing from the “Don’t 

knows” to the “For the motion.”  Uh, after our debaters did their 

best to persuade you, you voted, 70.35 percent for the motion, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz, Intelligence Squared- America is too damn religiousPage 68. 

and 24.34 percent against the motion, and only 5.31 percent now 

in the “Don’t know” category.  So, congratulations to all the 

debaters but especially for those supporting the motion.  

[APPLAUSE]  Thank you very much.   

 

END OF TAPE  

 
 
 


