
 
MEDIA TRANSCRIPTS, INC. 

41 WEST 83rd STREET  NEW YORK, N.Y.  10024   (212)  362-1481 

 

FOR The Rosenkranz Foundation/ 

Intelligence Squared US 

 

DATE 10/7/08 

America is finally winning the war in Iraq 
Moderator:                 John Donvan 

For the motion:          Frederick Kagan, Jack Keane 

Against the motion:  Charles Ferguson, Sir Malcolm Rifkind 

 

 
RESULTS 

Before the debate:                                                  

For the motion:  20% 

Against the motion:  54% 

Undecided:  26% 

 

After the debate: 

For the motion:  36% 

Against the motion:  53% 

Undecided:  11% 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN 

Now our debaters have just come to the stage, I want to begin the 

evening with a round of applause for all of them.  [APPLAUSE]  At 

this point, tedious as it is, I must ask you to make sure your cell 

phones are off…and I want to explain that, these debates are 

heard throughout the nation on NPR stations, 150 NPR stations.   

For that reason, I have to do certain bits of business that might 

seem somewhat inexplicable, such as repeating certain set 

phrases over and over again.  Please understand I have not lost 

my mind at that point, I am simply doing the radio bits of the 

program and they will pass quickly.  And with that I would like to 

introduce the chairman of Intelligence Squared US, Robert 

Rosenkranz.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 2. 

 

 

 

[APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT ROSENKRANZ 

Well, thank you very much, and welcome.  Our debate tonight is 

“America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq.”  Now this is—the 

topic is not:  The security position in Iraq is dramatically 

improved.  I think it’s very difficult to argue that one.  I’d like to 

quote from a United States Senator who voted against the surge 

and still feels that his vote was correct.  He said, quote, “In the 

18 months since President Bush announced the surge, our 

troops have performed heroically in bringing down the level of 

violence.   New tactics have protected the Iraqi population, and 

the Sunni tribes have rejected al-Qaeda, greatly weakening its 

effectiveness.”  That United States Senator was Barack Obama.   

Most of the times when I get up before this audience to talk 

about the debate, I try to talk about semantics, because we don’t 

want the debate really to be about the language of the resolution.   

 

But this time it’s different, this time the debate in a very real 

sense is about the language of the resolution.  What does it mean 

to be “winning” the war in Iraq.  Well it seems to me that there 

are a number of levels at which you might, uh, gauge success.   

First of all is the notion that after we leave, will there be sectarian 

violence, will there be civil war.  At a minimum, the answer to 

that has to be no.  But again…there are goals for what the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 3. 

 

 

 

domestic situation in Iraq might look like after success.   A 

reasonably decent society, a reasonably representative 

government.  Raising the bar even higher, US strategic interests, 

the US would like to have a friendly Iraq.  We’d like to have 

security for our energy supplies, we’d like to be able to project 

military power in the region, to a greater extent than we could 

before we entered this war. 

 

And finally there are strategic regional considerations.  We’d like 

to be able to manage Kurdish aspirations without doing violence 

to our ongoing relationship with Turkey.  We’d like to be able to 

manage Shia aspirations, without handing Iran even more 

influence in the region than it already has.  So these are very 

daunting goals for victory and I’m not suggesting that we have to 

achieve all of them, but the meaning of the resolution, the 

meaning of what we mean by winning the war in Iraq, is really in 

a sense the subject of tonight’s debate.  We have an extraordinary 

panel, and I’m in for a treat that many of you have already had 

which is the experience of John Donvan as moderator.  And it’s 

really my pleasure to turn the evening over to John.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Robert.  May I urge one more round of applause for 

Robert Rosenkranz for making these evenings possible.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 4. 

 

 

 

[APPLAUSE]  I’m John Donvan, a correspondent for ABC News 

and ABC News “Nightline,” and your host and moderator for this 

Intelligence Squared US debate, Oxford-style debating, brought to 

American shores, where, in this program, the motion is, “America 

is Finally Winning the War in Iraq.”  We are speaking and 

gathered at the Caspary Auditorium at The Rockefeller University 

in New York City.  You will hear from four panelists on this 

motion, two who are for the motion, and two who are against.   

The debate will take place in three parts, there will be an opening 

section, a mix-it-up section of Q-and-A including questions from 

me and questions from you, the audience, and then finally 

closing statements.   

 

This is a contest of persuasion.  The goal of the panelists is to the 

change the minds of this audience assembled in an 

amphitheater, surrounding the stage, several hundred of you, 

who will come into this event, with their minds perhaps not made 

up, or made up, the goal of these people is to move your opinion.   

Shortly we will take a vote to see what your views are on this 

motion as you come in off the streets, but I first want to explain.  

In the opening round the panelists will have seven minutes each.  

As they approach the six-minute mark, in order to provide them 

with a warning that their time is running out, they will hear a 

tone that sounds like this—  [TONE]   That’s the one-minute 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 5. 

 

 

 

mark, we consider it rather gentle and mild.  But to be taken 

seriously.  At seven minutes, if the speaker has not wrapped up, 

the tone will become more insistent, more like this—  

[REPEATING TONE]  And nobody wants to talk through that.   

 

So once again the topic tonight is, “America is Finally Winning 

the War in Iraq.”  It is time now to take our vote, and, as you see, 

by your seats you have a device that will allow you to vote on this 

motion.  If you are for the motion, “America is Finally Winning 

the War in Iraq,” please press number 1.   If you are against the 

motion, number 2.  If you are undecided at this point, please 

push number 3.  [PAUSE]  Does anyone need more time?  It’s 

really rather simple.  It’s time now for our panelists to begin 

making their opening statements, and I just want to go back, and 

remind people of where we were in 2006 when the war in Iraq 

was not going very well from the point of view of the United 

States, and from the point of view of President Bush, who wanted 

a victory.   

 

He sought out a go-between, somebody who could make a trip 

out to the war front, and come back and tell him whether victory 

was possible, and how.  The person he chose is our first panelist 

tonight, retired four-star general, Jack Keane, who made those 

trips to Iraq, and came back convinced that a surge was the way 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 6. 

 

 

 

to go.   Often to the chagrin of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, he made 

this argument to the President in a series of meetings over 

several weeks and months.  The entire story is told in Bob 

Woodward’s most recent book, but at this point you certainly 

know where General Jack Keane stands on our motion, “America 

is Finally Winning the War in Iraq.”  General?   

[APPLAUSE]   

JACK KEANE 

Thank you very much.  Appreciate that nice introduction.  

Somewhat accurate, somewhat inaccurate.  [LAUGHTER]  It’s 

always great to be back in my hometown, New York City.  I don’t 

need much excuse to come here, I love this place.  Even though I 

spent most of my adult life in other places.   But it always has 

been home, even though I don’t live here, I live in Washington, 

D.C.  I come here for the Metropolitan Opera and my beloved 

Yankees.  I know I’ve probably alienated half the audience now, 

I’m not supposed to do that.  [LAUGHTER]   But I’m delighted to 

be here and obviously this is an important subject and one that 

Fred and I have been very much involved in for a couple years.  

My involvement in Iraq goes back to 2003 when I was on active 

duty and, I visited Iraq right after the invasion, and shortly left 

active duty.  I joined Secretary Rumsfeld’s policy board at his 

request with Henry Kissinger and Newt Gingrich and Tom Foley 

and Freddy Clay, a bunch of others.   And Iraq became an 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 7. 

 

 

 

increasingly more important subject for us, as the war unfolded 

before our eyes and the challenges that we were facing.  In 2006, 

I parted company with the administration and the Pentagon over 

the war in Iraq, because I thought—I believed our strategy was 

failing.   

 

I took that message to Secretary Rumsfeld, and also the 

chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Peter Pace, and had devised a new 

strategy to help promulgate that.  While I was in the throes of 

developing that strategy I met Fred Kagan, over at the American 

Enterprise Institute, and he put together a planning group that 

was looking at the war and a new strategy, and we found that, 

our ideas were exactly the same.   And eventually, with others, 

and I may say others, that had some influence on the President of 

the United States to admit, that the strategy was failing, and it 

needed to be changed.  I tell you that because, I knew what 

failure looked like.  And I think so did you.  And I also know what 

the word “winning,” or “success” looks like in Iraq, it’s been a 

stunning achievement in Iraq, somewhat unprecedented in the 

history of counterinsurgency warfare, for such a dramatic 

turnaround in such a short period of time.   

 

And that stunning achievement that…you are generally familiar 

with it.  But it’s based certainly on a new strategy, but it’s also 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 8. 

 

 

 

based on the premise that security was a necessary precondition 

for political and economic progress.  We had never had that, as a 

staple, before we tried to do it complementary among those three 

issues, and that blew up and failed.   That’s the reality of it.  So 

we had to get security if we were gonna make political progress 

and that is a stunning achievement, in such a short period of 

time.  Zero ethno-sectarian violence.   All of the violence 

dramatically down 60 to 80 percent depending on the category, I 

won’t go into the details of all of that, some of you are familiar 

with it but it’s quite remarkable.  Most of the time, we go to Iraq 

every few months, about every three months for two weeks at a 

time, we spend most of our time with the Iraqi people.   

 

Out on the streets where they are, in the schools, in their 

hospitals, seeing what life was like, in 2006, no children going to 

schools, hundreds of people being killed every week, people not 

going to their jobs, only going to marketplaces to seek provisions 

on an emergency basis.   Terrorized and intimidated, a country 

fracturing, heading towards civil war, it was not a civil war, and a 

possibly failed state.  The conditions in Iraq today and gradually 

improving over 2007 and 2008 are a dramatic difference.  

Schools, all schools, are open, in Iraq.  Primary, secondary, and 

27 colleges, universities and technical colleges that they, they 

have in Iraq.   The marketplaces are teeming, there’s a social 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 9. 

 

 

 

fabric in Iraq that’s taken place in the evening, or on the days off 

when people are visiting zoos and what’s left of museums and, 

the, the natural rhythm of life is returning to the people of Iraq.   

 

Iraq is all about its people, in my judgment, so that is why we 

spend so much time understanding what happened to them, and 

what is now happening to them.  And it’s fascinating to see.  The 

security situation dramatically improved because the mainstream 

Sunni insurgents who started the war have capitulated.   They 

have surrendered.  They are coming into the political process, to 

achieve their political objectives.  And that is a dramatic 

turnaround and that’s how insurgency—either insurgencies end 

when they walk away and leave the field of battle or they come 

into the political process.   The al-Qaeda have been operationally 

defeated.  They no longer threaten the legitimacy of the regime.  

They cannot mount a sustained campaign to do that.  They don’t 

have the infrastructure or the networks to do it.  Shia extremism, 

has had a major setback supported by the Iranians, and as time 

appears to be playing out for us, it appears that it’s going to be a 

major defeat as well.   

 

The impact on the political process, is extraordinary, there’s a 

rising political class in Iraq, that we have seen.  Every place you 

go in Iraq, people are interested in the political process.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 10. 

 

 

 

Participating in it, there are 500-plus parties in Iraq.   I mean, we 

struggle with these two that we have.  [LAUGHTER]  To say the 

least.  Can you imagine what it’s like.  The youth in Iraq, and 

we’ve attended some of their party meetings, it’s wonderful to see 

their energy and their motivation and to participate in something 

that’s all new to them.  A fledgling democracy.   It’s fascinating to 

see this taking hold in Iraq.  The national legislative [WARNING 

TONE] benchmarks, 18 of them have been…  Only one out of the 

18 has not succeeded, and that is really, quite dramatic.   

 

The political reconciliation that has taken place in Iraq is very 

real, the most recent one is the Provincial Election Law, which 

will redefine Iraq, it is a seminal event.  Power will be shared, and 

diffused in the provinces, the people will get better services as a 

result of it, they will have their own budgets, they will have a 

place to go to express their grievances and their needs.   Iraq will 

never be the same again as a result of what is gonna take place 

in January of this year.  Less than three years after this 

government, as inefficient as it has been at times and ineffective 

as it has been at times, when you draw back from it, it has been 

a remarkable movement towards what the premise is here.  

Success in Iraq, success [REPEATING TONE] in Iraq for them, 

and success in Iraq for us.   

[APPLAUSE]    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 11. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, General Jack Keane, arguing for the motion.  When a 

guy hits it big in software and then he sells his company to 

Microsoft for more than $100 million and then he decides that he 

wants to start making movies, there is a tendency to think well 

maybe here’s another rich guy with a vanity project on his mind,   

except that the movie that our next panelist made, his name is 

Charles Ferguson, it’s a documentary on the US experience in 

Iraq.  It premiered last year and was almost universally reviewed 

as superb and serious and ultimately became a contender for an 

Oscar award.  Though he did not oppose the invasion of Iraq 

initially, the title of his film tells you where he stands now, very 

quickly, it is called, No End in Sight.  Charles Ferguson, arguing 

tonight against the motion.   

[APPLAUSE]   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

Thank you very much, I made this film actually, largely because 

of my heritage as a policy wonk, before I made money, I got a 

doctorate in political science at MIT, my thesis advisor, Carl 

Kazin, had been Deputy National Security Advisor for President 

Kennedy.  And he endeavored to teach me to think rigorously 

about these matters and I will leave it to you to see whether he 

succeeded to any measure.  He also had a wicked sense of humor 

which I will feebly attempt to imitate.  If the entire cast of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 12. 

 

 

 

“Saturday Night Live” had somehow gotten together with the 

Marx Brothers, the Three Stooges, and Charlie Chaplin, and they 

had tried, in their wildest dreams, to think up a catastrophe of a 

war, they could not possibly have become remotely close, to what 

the Bush administration did in Iraq.  [LAUGHTER]   And, I will 

endeavor to demonstrate that, in the remaining time of my 

remarks, damage on that scale is not repaired with a surge, it is 

not repaired over a short time, this is something that that nation 

and the United States and the world are going to be recovering 

from for decades.   

 

And, if you think that we’re winning the war in Iraq in any 

meaningful sense now, then, I invite you to wait a few weeks 

when the Dow is down to about 2000, and Henry Paulsen stands 

on the rubble of the American financial system and declares 

victory when the bleeding has stopped.   That would be a roughly 

comparable—and I’m sure that will happen soon—that would be 

a roughly comparable kind of event.  Why was this war fought in 

the view of those who decided to fight it?  I was an ambivalently, 

complicatedly, slightly favorable towards the war kind of person, 

or towards the idea of deposing Saddam.   It was fought to 

remove the threat of WMD from Iraq, and also from the region.  

To install a pro-Western democratic government, to bring peace 

and freedom and liberty and security to the population of Iraq 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 13. 

 

 

 

and also to spread that to the entire Middle East.    

 

It was also intended to assist the United States in bringing 

economic, diplomatic and military pressure on Iraq so that it 

would stop developing nuclear weapons.  The administration 

predicted, and, sometimes said this publicly, believed it 

internally, widely known, widely quoted, that the costs of the war 

might reach $50 billion.  And that US forces would probably be 

substantially withdrawn by September of 2003.  So, what 

happened.  Not enough troops were used.  Planning for the war 

began 60 days before the invasion, planning for—excuse me, 

planning for the occupation, began 60 days before the invasion.    

It was vastly inadequate.  Looting destroyed the entire country, 

most of its infrastructure, 16 of 20 ministries, most important 

infrastructural objects, power plants, et cetera, were destroyed by 

the looting.  The looting went completely unchecked by US forces.   

 

Ambassador Bremer when appointed, before he had set foot in 

Iraq for the first time in his life, a man who had never served in 

the military, never overseen an occupation of any kind, on May 

9th, 2003, he decided that he was going to issue a de-

Baathification order, which lopped off and purged for life the top 

50,000 administrators and technocrats in Iraq.  He then 

disbanded the Iraqi military, throwing half a million soldiers onto 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 14. 

 

 

 

the street, unemployed, with no notice.  Who promptly formed 

the insurgency.  Virtually nothing was done about the 

insurgency, for quite a long time its existence was denied. 

Economic policy was placed in the hands of politically appointed 

ideologues.  And what did we see as a result.  4,000 Americans 

dead so far, a trillion and a half dollars spent, 100,000 Americans 

wounded, twice the official number.  The official number is a vast 

underestimate.   

 

And an Iraq that is just destroyed.  Of Iraq’s 34,000 physicians, 

2,000 were assassinated, 20,000 left.  25 percent of the 

population of Iraq is either dead, or is displaced internally, or is 

external refugees, the equivalent of 60 million people in the 

United States having left the country.  At the peak of the violence, 

several hundred people per day in Iraq, were being kidnapped or 

killed.  Okay, so, but what of Iraq now, I hear you say.  Has this 

country become a paradise.  No it has not.  Violence is down.  It’s 

down roughly 75 percent, we don’t know exactly how much.   To 

some degree a sense of normalcy is returning to the country.  

People are haltingly able to go to school, to go to work now in 

ways that they previously were not.  But, the infrastructure of the 

country remains destroyed, by most indicators, it remains below 

pre-war levels, in matters such as water supply, sewage 

treatment, electricity, power generation.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 15. 

 

 

 

 

The country is enormously traumatized, it went from being 55 or 

60 percent Shia to now, probably 80 percent Shia because the 

refugees are overwhelmingly Sunni.  [WARNING TONE]  And a 

population and a government increasingly dominated, already 

thoroughly dominated by rather extremist, fundamentalist 

Islamic parties and beliefs.   It’s difficult to believe, but Iraq still 

with the violence down 75 percent, Iraq is still a more dangerous 

place and a more hostile place, and a worse place, for most 

people, than it was under Saddam Hussein.  That is difficult to 

achieve.  But we managed.  [LAUGHTER]   In addition, we have 

enormously strengthened Iran, which is continuing to develop 

nuclear weapons, unchecked by the United States.  The 

American military is debilitated and tied down in this country, 

unable to do anything about the rapidly worsening situation in 

Afghanistan and Pakistan.  The military is exhausted.  And, as 

far as I know, those 4,000 Americans are still dead, those 

[REPEATING TONE] half-million Iraqis are still dead, and the 

situation remains, I fear, irretrievable.  Thank you.  

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Charles Ferguson, I’m John Donvan, and this is 

Intelligence Squared US, Oxford-style debating.  We have four 

panelists, for and against our proposition, which tonight is 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 16. 

 

 

 

“America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq,” we are halfway 

through our opening statements, and we’re now going to turn to 

once again to the side for the motion.  Jack Keane’s debating 

partner, as he mentioned, was also his partner in advising the 

administration on going ahead with the surge and as General 

Keane pointed out it wasn’t just the two of them, there were other 

people.   But Fred Kagan has been universally described as the 

architect of the surge at the American Enterprise Institute.  He 

put the words on paper and connected the dots and drew up the 

charts and put together most cohesively the argument that 

ultimately persuaded the White House that the surge was the 

way to go.   He is very much a player in the story of the surge 

having taken place.  Arguing for the motion, “America is Finally 

Winning the War in Iraq,” Fred Kagan.   

[APPLAUSE]   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

Thank you very much, it’s an honor to be here, it’s an honor to be 

talking about this extremely important topic.  I might object to, 

excessive levity and discussions of Marx Brothers and so forth, in 

regard to a war that has cost the lives of many thousands of 

people, I actually think this issue’s a little more serious than that 

frankly.   Without meaning to spend my time taking on directly 

the comments that were just made I’m going to mention a couple 

of errors of fact.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 17. 

 

 

 

 

Electricity production is higher than pre-war levels in Iraq, that is 

a fact.  The country is not 80 percent Shia, although I’m sure 

that some of the Shia parties would like to believe that.  But it 

absolutely is not.    And is life worse than under Saddam, well, 

that depends on who you are.  And, this has definitely been a 

traumatic, miserable experience for the Iraqi people.  I am in full 

agreement with the assertion that the Bush administration 

planned for the war badly, conducted the war badly, lived in 

denial for years.   I was on record for all of that time, criticizing 

the strategy that was being pursued, criticizing the 

administration…I get it.  It’s also irrelevant, to the point at hand.  

And it’s unfortunate in our national discourse, that we spend so 

much of our time refighting the issue of whether or not this was a 

good idea, and not enough time talking about where we are, 

where we’re headed, what our interests are, and whether we are 

likely to be able to achieve them.   

 

Which is from the standpoint of a decision-maker, the only thing 

that matters.  And particularly since, President Bush, will not be 

running for office again, the question of his wisdom or un-wisdom 

in ordering this war, is something that can be safely left to the 

historians at this point.  So, the question is where are we now, 

and the question the motion has put is, are we winning the war.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 18. 

 

 

 

I would like to amend the motion to say, “America and the Iraqis 

Are Now Finally Winning.”   Because one of the things that has 

gone unnoticed, is that, a tremendous portion of the fighting that 

was done over the past 18 months was done by Iraqis.  Including 

the 100,000 Iraqi security forces that came on line, in a year, 

trained in contact with the enemy, marched directly into the fight 

against the enemy, both Sunni and Shia, and defeated the enemy 

across the board with American assistance of course.  It was a 

remarkable thing.   

 

One of the most remarkable instances of this, was when Prime 

Minister al-Maliki ordered the Iraqi security forces to clear the 

city of Basra, which was under the control of enemy groups of 

one sort and another.   And, the initial operation was a disaster.  

We worked hard to help him fix it, he worked hard to fix it, and 

one of the things that he did to fix it, was to order the quick 

reaction force of the First Iraqi Army Division, to reinforce.   That 

division is based in Anbar.  It is a heavily Sunni division.  It 

marched into Basra, where there are virtually no Sunni, and 

immediately began fighting against local militias and criminals.  

There were no instances of sectarianism, either by that formation 

or against that formation.   It was accepted, as the legitimate 

military force of the government of Iraq, acting against criminals 

and enemies of Iraq.  As an instance of reconciliation, and what 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 19. 

 

 

 

this government means to Iraqis now, there are few cases that 

could be more poignant than that.   

 

That formation remained in the south, it continued to fight right 

up to the Iranian border…which also sent a message to Iran by 

the way.  And as we talk about how Iran has been strengthened 

by this war, we need to talk about how Iran has been dealt a 

tremendous defeat, by the destruction of its key proxy in Iraq, 

Muqtada al-Sadr’s Jaysh al-Mahdi, which organization was 

militarily defeated, and has now largely disbanded politically as 

well.   Muqtada himself is in disgrace, and the Iranians are 

scrambling, and hoping, that we will take council of our despair 

and leave Iraq to its fate.  The question will be put…was this war 

worth it.  I would submit, that that’s a slightly different question 

from whether we are winning or not and we can parse the 

semantics of this any way you like.   

 

As a military analyst which is all that I am, I can tell you, the 

trend lines now, are positive.  The importance of the elections law 

that was just passed, passed most Americans by.  It is a 

watershed event.  And I can tell that, because I’ve had in the past 

few weeks, conversations with senior politicians, senior Iraqi 

military leaders, I’m sorry, senior Iraqi politicians, Sunni and 

Shia, and before that law was passed, they were very grim, and 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 20. 

 

 

 

very gloomy, and so was I.   After that law was passed, the nature 

of the conversations that I had with these gentlemen, changed 

entirely.  And instead of the gloom and doom, we had, almost 

wistful conversations [WARNING TONE] about, how Iraq will form 

itself into a country.   How the Sunni and Shia will work together, 

what the relationship between Arabs and Kurds will be, and they 

also all made to me an interesting point. 

 

They said, you know, Iraq will be a rival to Saudi Arabia.  A rival 

in oil, and also, a threat to Saudi Arabia because Iraq will be a 

democracy.  And Iraq will pose a challenge to authoritarian 

regimes around the region, and Iraq will be aligned with the 

United States.  They were telling me that.   Now I believe that 

that’s true, and I believe that it is attainable, and I think that the 

evidence shows that, and I think that, if we are in fact headed in 

that direction and we can in fact make that happen, then, this 

war will have been worth fighting.  Thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Fred Kagan, speaking for the motion.  Sir Malcolm 

Rifkind has held the post of Foreign Secretary of the United 

Kingdom and Defense Secretary, a combination that, in this 

country the only figure I can think of to have comparably held the 

positions of state and defense would be George Marshall.  You 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 21. 

 

 

 

can tell me, Fred, if I’m wrong on that.  He is a friend of the 

United States as a member of the Conservative Party who’s been 

in politics for 40 years, a supporter of many American policies 

and the special relationship, but when it came to Iraq, he said 

no.  He was against going in, he is against staying in now, and he 

will be arguing against the motion, Sir Malcolm Rifkind.   

[APPLAUSE]   

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND 

Thank you very much indeed for your warm welcome.  Lyndon 

Johnson once said that was the sort of introduction which my 

father would’ve enjoyed and my mother would’ve believed.  

[LAUGHTER]  I’m conscious that I’m the fourth person to speak 

this evening so I will say what King Henry XIII of England is 

reputed to have said to each of his six wives.  “Please don’t worry, 

I don’t intend to keep you long.”  [LAUGHTER]   I was at first 

concerned when I was asked to take part in this debate, whether, 

as a British politician, I should be speaking in a debate about the 

United States.  But I reflected that George W. Bush’s closest ally 

in the decision to go to war, was Tony Blair.   British troops have 

been in Iraq over those five years, British soldiers have died, and 

Britain and the United States share a responsibility, along with 

other coalition countries, for what has happened.  I don’t dispute 

for a moment that the surge to which reference has been made 

this evening, has been successful in military terms, in reducing 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 22. 

 

 

 

the amount of violence.   I don’t doubt that the insurgency itself, 

may be slowly coming to an end, and that fewer people are being 

killed on the streets of Baghdad, than was the case in the past.  

But of course that is true of all wars, all wars gradually grind to 

an end, in one form or another.   

 

But that is not the same as saying, that you have won that war.  

Because to say that you have won or are winning the war, you 

have to answer two questions.  First of all, are we going to 

achieve the reasons why we went to war in the first place, either 

in whole or in part, and even if we were, does the price that has 

been paid, by the people of Iraq and by the West as a whole, 

make that sacrifice having been worth being made.  Now when 

you look at what the plus side is, and there’s one factor that also 

has to be mentioned at this moment.  This is not a war like Pearl 

Harbor.  Or like the war in Afghanistan after 9-11, or the first 

Gulf War to liberate Kuwait.   You are wrong, General Keane, to 

say that Sunni insurgents started this war, they didn’t.  The 

United States, the United Kingdom and the coalition started this 

war, and they had not been attacked when they chose to do so.   

 

So what has been achieved.  Let us be generous and 

acknowledge, certain things have been achieved.  Saddam 

Hussein is gone and there isn’t a person who will be other than 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 23. 

 

 

 

pleased to see him go.  But you know, we’d like to see Mugabe go 

without going to war in Zimbabwe, we’d like to see Kim Jong-il in 

North Korea go.   We’d have liked to have seen Fidel Castro go.  

These are not justifications for a war.  And yes it’s true, Iraq may 

have a more representative government than it’s had for many 

years.  But it’s not a democratic government, it’s a sectarian 

government of finely balanced Shia and Sunni, who when they’ve 

not been slaughtering each other in the last five years, have 

formed a very, very uneasy coalition.   And yes, fewer people are 

being killed.  But by God, you know, that can rise again, at any 

moment, for all we know.  When you look at the price that has 

been paid and continues to be paid, that cannot simply be put on 

one side, as simply history, as Mr. Kagan implied.   

 

We know that first of all that the weapons of mass destruction 

which were the main reason for going to war, never existed.  We 

know that by the admission of President Bush, at least 30,000 

Iraqis have lost their lives, and indeed the Iraqi government say 

over 100,000 Iraqis have lost their lives in the last five years.   We 

know that four million Iraqis have become refugees, half of them 

fleeing to other countries.  40 percent of the Iraqi middle class, 

no longer live in Iraq, and as a consequence, the job of rebuilding 

Iraq is going to be immeasurably more difficult.   And we know 

also that the coalition forces, mainly American, have lost over 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 24. 

 

 

 

4,000 lives.  These are a heavy burden.  But it’s not just the 

internal cost that is being paid, look at what has happened in 

terms of the wider situation.   We know for example that the 

consequence of this war is that Iran…the most dangerous 

country in the region, has, thanks to the United States and the 

coalition, now become the most powerful country in the Gulf.   

 

The Iranians cannot believe their luck.  Without raising a finger, 

Iraq which was the state that was their main competitor in the 

Gulf, has been essentially emasculated, for the foreseeable 

future.  We know that al-Qaeda, who were never allowed to 

operate in Iraq under Saddam Hussein, have been active, have 

penetrated Iraq and even if they are ultimately defeated, have 

already radicalized sections of the community and done 

enormous harm.   We know that the new Iraqi government is not 

going to be any more pro-Israeli, than any other Arab state, why 

should they be, they are an Arab government, they will share the 

view of the Arab world.  And we know also, that the United States 

in particular, has lost at this vital time its moral leadership of the 

world, because of having initiated this terrible conflict.   

 

But perhaps the most serious geopolitical problem, that has 

flown from this ill-judged initiative and invasion, has been that 

the real drama of the present time in that region, is Iran’s 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 25. 

 

 

 

attempts to develop nuclear weapons.   And we know that as a 

consequence of the loss of authority, of the loss of leadership, 

that the United States in particular has experienced as a result of 

the Iraq war, the United States has found it incredibly more 

difficult to get agreement either in the Security Council or in the 

international community, to take the kind of steps against Iran, 

that would be necessary in order to encourage it to desist from its 

nuclear ambitions.   So when you talk about “winning the war,” 

it’s not possible as General Keane implied, [WARNING TONE] to 

simply think of that in purely military terms.  One has to look at 

the overall cost, and the overall benefits.   And I conclude simply 

by saying this.  At best you can say, we may be stopping losing 

the war, but we’re certainly not winning it.  And I simply remind 

you of the words said almost 2,000 years ago, by Tacitus, a great 

Roman, when in comparable circumstances, he said, “They have 

created a wilderness, and they call it peace.”  That is our legacy.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Sir Malcolm Rifkind, arguing against the motion, we 

have the results of your points of view with which you arrived for 

this debate, they are rather lopsided.  Those of you who are for 

the motion, that “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq,” 

represent 20 percent of you, 54 percent of you are against the 

motion, and twenty-six percent of you are undecided.  And again, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 26. 

 

 

 

the point of the evening is to see the degree to which those 

numbers can be moved by the quality of our debate.  Now we’re 

going to move into the mix it up section of the program, and at 

this point I’d like you to begin formulating the questions that you 

would like to ask.  I know that there are some journalists that 

would like to ask questions.  When they are called upon we 

would prefer that you identify yourselves, and your organization.  

The rest of you may remain yourselves, or remain anonymous.  

We have microphones moving through the hall, and once again to 

remind you to please hold the microphone very close to your 

mouth.  But, I want to start with the question to Charles 

Ferguson.  Charles, I heard you outlining, in some detail, why 

going to war in the first place, perhaps, was a mistake, and why 

the war was prosecuted badly in its first stages, which is a 

separate question from, now going forward, is the US winning, or 

can the US win?  And I want to ask you what would be victory 

from your point of view, putting aside whether the war was a 

mistake in the first place.   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

Well, I think we’ve, I think we’ve reached the point at which a 

victory by any meaningful standard is no longer possible.  I think 

that we’re simply now trying to reach a situation that represents 

some minimal level of stability and some reasonable degree to 

which our enormous mistakes have been redressed or stabilized.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 27. 

 

 

 

The reason that I mentioned the way we conducted the 

occupation, is that the enormity of those mistakes and their 

consequences are going to be with us for decades— 

JOHN DONVAN  

Well, what would have been victory, is more my question?   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

Oh, I'm sorry.  If indeed Iraq had been stabilized, if there had 

been, as almost every pre-war advisory study recommended, if 

there had been a larger number of troops, if there had been a 

large number of Arabic speakers, if there had been a large 

international constabulary force, if the country had had a 

transitional period of martial law, and then after that gave way to, 

or was turned into something from a full democracy, which I 

think that most analysts think was quite unrealistic, but a soft 

dictatorship, something more like Egypt, say.  Then that would 

have been, if not a victory, something that would certainly not 

have been a complete, unmitigated disaster.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Fred Kagan, did you hear in that answer any benchmarks that 

you think are, are in the process of being hit?   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

I'm troubled by the notion that you can simply dismiss the entire 

question of whether we’re winning or not by saying that the sum 

cost is already so high that nothing we could do could 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 28. 

 

 

 

conceivably make it worthwhile.  Which is rather an intellectual 

cop out in my opinion.  It strikes me that, um, one still has to ask 

the question, what is the situation that we face, and what are the 

probabilities of obtaining our objectives?  I would say, although 

I'm fully in agreement with you about the mistakes that were 

made, I believe that we have actually obtained many of the goals 

that you’ve just laid out.  We clearly have a disagreement about 

the facts.  I do believe that Iraq is being stabilized.  With all 

respect, Sir Malcolm, I do not think that it is likely that you will 

see violence suddenly explode again, unbeknownst to us.  

Because when you make it your mission to go around Iraq on a 

regular basis, and to see what’s going on in the particulars, 

rather than having this conversation from thirty thousand feet 

about Sunni and Shia who don’t like each other and are killing 

each other, and so forth, what you will see is that violence in a 

particular area results from circumstances in a particular area, 

there are larger issues of course, but it is astonishing how fractal 

the complexity of this country is.   And the fact that, what I would 

like to do is have a conversation with you region by region, area 

by area, and talk about what had been generating violence, why 

it’s not there anymore, and why I think that it will not be coming 

back anytime soon in that form.  That's how life really works.  

And that is what we see on the ground.  And we see a 

government forming that is increasingly seen as legitimate by its 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 29. 

 

 

 

people, which is astonishing.  We see elections coming up that 

have galvanized and excited the Iraqi people like few things 

before.   And the astonishing thing is having spoken with Iraqi 

political leaders, Sunni, Shia, and Kurds, they all think that 

efforts will be made to rig the elections.  They all think that some 

of those efforts will succeed, and they all expect to abide by the 

results of the elections.  In my mind, that’s a very healthy 

understanding of what democracy is likely to be like.  

[LAUGHTER]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Fred, let me bring, Sir Malcolm, it sounds like you were 

contradicted there.  Could you, I just want to ask that you sit a 

little bit more— 

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND 

Sure.  Mr. Kagan claims that winning the war is because the 

fighting may be coming to an end.  There has never been a war in 

the history of mankind that does not eventually come to an end 

as the people involved exhaust themselves.  And let us accept 

that al Qaeda is not going to be the victor in this war, although 

they’ve already been responsible for many people’s deaths.  The 

point that I have to keep emphasizing is that the, the sheer 

trauma, the sheer disaster that Iraq has been for the last five 

years wasn’t just predictable, it was predicted.  If you go into a 

country and destroy its government without understanding the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 30. 

 

 

 

nature of that society, and if you remove an existing regime, you 

create a political vacuum.  And in a situation where Shia and 

Sunni have been enemies for hundreds of years, it was inevitable 

that there was going to be this outburst of sectarian conflict.  If 

the United States and the United Kingdom did not understand 

that or did not accept that, then they're even more culpable.  So, 

to say that now we may be in a situation where the fighting may 

be slowly coming to an end, and to see that as winning the war, 

as if somehow we can simply ignore what has come before— 

JOHN DONVAN  

General Jack Keane— 

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND 

It does not bear credibility.  

JOHN DONVAN 

General Jack Keane, for the motion.   

JACK KEANE 

I think coming to an end is a condition that enables us to make 

political, and eventually economic progress.   And that is why it’s 

so important, because we could not do that with the hell and 

chaos that was taking place in that country.  The political 

progress is dramatically real.  If you just listen to what he Shia 

dominated government that Sir Malcolm just wipes away as, as 

not having any intention of building a better Iraq, this 

government has passed a de-Baathification law which changes 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 31. 

 

 

 

the very social fabric of life in Iraq.  It’s equivalent to our civil 

rights legislation, which took us a hundred years past the end of 

the Civil War.  It permits the Sunnis to participate in the full 

fabric of life where they were denied that participation by Paul 

Bremer and our policy back in 2003.  The Shia dominated 

government passed an amnesty law which will free thousands of 

Sunnis from jail, who were trying to kill that government and 

return to power themselves.  They have done that.  Why have 

they don’t that?  Why have they made that decision?  They made 

that decision because they know that they have to reconcile with 

the Sunnis and with those who wanted to regain power if they're 

going to have a future.  That is a courageous decision that they’ve 

made, even given the limited political experience that many of 

these leaders have had who have been thrust into these positions 

in the last three years as, where there was thirty-five years of 

autocratic repression in this, in this country.  That is dramatic 

change that is taking place in Iraq, and it has to give you a sense 

of hope.  Our objectives are pretty clear, and we’re well on our 

way to achieving them.  We want a government in Iraq that is 

elected by its people.  That has already taken place, and will be 

reinforced by the provincial elections which will further defuse 

that, and make it even a more powerful political model.  There 

will be also national elections in 2000, at the end of 2009.  We 

want a country that is stable and secure and capable of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 32. 

 

 

 

protecting its people.  And that is taking place, and is not a threat 

to its neighbors.  We do not want it to be a haven for radicalism 

in the region, to be sure.  And that has been rid of.  They came 

there because of our presence, to be sure, but also Saddam 

Hussein attracts radicalism.  And I'm not re-fighting why we went 

into the war, I'm trying to deal with what we have here, and the 

opportunity that is front of us in terms of what our realistic 

objectives are.  We have a country that wants to be aligned with 

us, that wants a strategic political relationship with us, that 

crosses education, political, cultural, educational ties.  They do 

not want that kind of relation with the Iranians, they want it with 

the United States of America.  Therefore, we will have the 

opportunity to have that kind of a strategic relationship with a 

duly elected government, the only government of its kind in the 

region, an Arab-Muslim country that has a duly elected 

government, and is aligned with the United States, and is a clear 

buffer against a threat in that region, which is radicalism, and 

particularly in the Iranians.  It already is a buffer, and it will be a 

greater one as this country continues to mature.   

JOHN DONVAN  

General, let me bring in Charles Ferguson.  Charles Ferguson, 

General Keane just said we want a government that is elected by 

its people, and we have that.  Do you dismiss that?   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 33. 

 

 

 

CHARLES FERGUSON 

I don't entirely dismiss it.  There is some degree of reality to Iraq’s 

democracy.  But a few points.  There are many countries in the 

world which hold elections, sometimes even elections that kind of 

mean something, Zimbabwe for example.  Transparency 

International hasn’t announced its 2008 ratings yet.  In 2007, 

the most recent year for which we have available, Transparency 

International rates countries on its corruption index, by their 

level of national corruption.  Iraq was rated number one hundred 

and seventy eight out of one hundred and eighty countries.  And 

most of the people with whom I speak, with great regret, I have 

not been back to Iraq since mid-2006 when I was there for the 

film.  But, I stay in touch with many people, and just about 

everybody with whom I speak says that the corruption problem 

has gotten notably worse since 2007 and continues to get worse, 

and this society is really, in many ways, approaching breakdown, 

even though by some measures, some very real, significant 

measures, it is improving.  But if you're a woman in Iraq— 

JOHN DONVAN  

Well, just a minute, Jack Keane explained a situation where 

people couldn't go to school, they're going to school again, they 

couldn't go shopping, they're going shopping again, which does 

not sound like a society that’s breaking down, it sounds like a 

society that’s knitting together.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 34. 

 

 

 

CHARLES FERGUSON 

I think both are happening at the same time.  But, for example, 

have any of the refugees returned?  No.  In fact, there is— 

FREDERICK KAGAN 

Yes, they have— 

CHARLES FERGUSON 

A very small number— 

JOHN DONVAN 

That’s Fred Kagan interrupting. 

CHARLES FERGUSON 

…there is still a net out-flux of ten thousand per month.  

JOHN DONVAN  

What about that, Fred Kagan.   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

I'm sorry, that’s just false.  Refugees have returned.  If you say, 

have any refugees returned, the answer is yes.   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

A tiny number— 

FREDERICK KAGAN 

If you say— 

CHARLES FERGUSON 

On a net basis, they are still leaving.   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

Are people leaving, that’s fine, we can have that conversation.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 35. 

 

 

 

But there have been refugees returning, there have been IDP’s 

returning as well.   This is a process that has been, that is 

ongoing, and I'm sorry, you have to, you have to recognize that.  

This is not the case where people are still fleeing the countries in 

droves, and that’s all that’s going on.  You’ve got movement back 

and forth.  One of the most important things that’s happened is 

that key leaders in Anbar, who had fled because of the al Qaeda 

violence, have returned. That was a key element of the Sakwa 

[PH], they have come back and taken up their traditional 

positions in society, which is one of the things that has allowed 

the creation of a new political dynamic in what had been the hot 

bed of the Sunni insurgency, and they are now participating in 

the Iraqi political process.  Those returnees may be small in 

number, but they are incredibly important for the future of the 

country.   

JOHN DONVAN  

As your moderator I'm hearing not just a difference of opinion on 

interpreting the facts, I'm hearing a difference of opinion on what 

the facts are.  For example, the question of electricity, either 

there is more electricity than before, or there isn't.   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

There is.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Which is it?   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 36. 

 

 

 

FREDERICK KAGAN 

There is.  There is.   

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND  

Hold on, let me get this in perspective.  No one— 

JOHN DONVAN 

Sir Malcolm Rifkind speaking.  

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND 

No one is, I think, suggesting that there is more electricity than 

there was before this war began.  All that Mr. Kagan and General 

Keane are saying is the war which we were responsible for 

creating, which destroyed Iraq’s infrastructure, which destroyed 

its schools and its hospitals and its electricity and drove millions 

of people abroad, all they are able even to claim is it’s now 

beginning to go back to what it was before we started this war.  

Now, if that is the culmination of this terrible five years, it’s not 

exactly something we can be proud of.   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

That’s not what we’re saying— 

JOHN DONVAN 

Fred Kagan— 

FREDERICK KAGAN 

And that is not the case.  Electrical generation and transmission 

in Iraq is higher, in fact significantly higher than it was before the 

war.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 37. 

 

 

 

CHARLES FERGUSON 

It is, in fact, that is true, it is, I'm sorry, I did make one 

misstatement, it’s about thirty percent higher than it was before 

the war.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Charles Ferguson.  

CHARLES FERGUSON 

Most other indicators, most other quality of life and 

infrastructural indicators, the availability of water, the availability 

of sewage treatment, the availability of education, et cetera, 

remain enormously below their pre-war levels.   

JOHN DONVAN  

We have several hands up, and I want to bring the audience into 

the conversation.  Again, my reminder, please perfect the art of 

the well-asked question, and hold your microphone quite close to 

your mouth, about one fist away.  A gentleman who is now 

standing up…?  The microphone being brought to you.  About 

halfway up the amphitheater.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

I thought this was supposed to be a debate with two people 

speaking for the motion and two against, but we’ve had four 

people speaking for the motion.  The point is that Mr. 

Ferguson and Sir Malcolm have said, you know, that things 

are getting better.  And if that’s not a step towards winning, I 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 38. 

 

 

 

don’t know what is.  I think that Mr. Ferguson and Mr. 

Malcolm are debating not a question that’s asked tonight, 

that’s on the board.  They're debating a question— 

JOHN DONVAN 

So what, formulate a question— 

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

And the question I want to ask them is, do you have any 

argument to show that America is not winning the war right now?   

JOHN DONVAN 

Sir Malcolm?   

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND  

If you mean winning the war means gradually getting domination 

over the insurgency, if that’s all you define as winning the war,  I 

happily acknowledge that.  And I said earlier, all wars eventually 

come to an end, and if the world’s great super power is not able 

to beat some insurgents in Iraq in military terms, it would be a 

very strange situation.  But winning the war means actually 

achieving the reasons why you went to war in the first place.  And 

by that definition, which is the only meaningful definition, no, we 

are not winning the war, it remains a total disaster for the people 

of Iraq, as the hundreds of thousands who have lost their lives, or 

who have been injured in this war, would happily testify if they 

were alive and able to do so.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 39. 

 

 

 

CHARLES FERGUSON 

I thought that both of us made it clear that we thought that this 

war had discredited the United States in the Mid-East and the 

entire world, had left Iran stronger, had pinned down the 

American military in Iraq so that it was able to deal with 

Afghanistan and Pakistan and a number of other issues.  I 

thought we had made that fairly clear, actually.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Question from the audience.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

I’d like to ask the, for the motion— 

JOHN DONVAN 

Can you put that mic really, that’s it, thank you.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

I’d like to ask the for the motion group to comment on some of 

the scary statistics around the flight of professional and middle 

class, and what do you see as the facts and the reality today of 

where the country stands.  And then how does that evolve or 

correct itself going forward as the country builds?   

JOHN DONVAN 

Now that’s a question.  [LAUGHTER]  Jack Keane.   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

Well actually, I'm going to start off.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 40. 

 

 

 

JACK KEANE 

Fred is going to start off.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Fred Kagan, his partner, will go first.  

FREDERICK KAGAN 

I, it’s interesting, I just had the, this similar conversation with a 

senior Iraqi military leader last night, in fact.  And he made a 

point that the flight of the middle class in Iraq, and the 

technocratic class began, in fact, with the rise of Saddam, when 

you had a tremendous number of highly educated people flee the 

country.  It certainly was exacerbated as the Baathist elements 

and the Sunni community, elements of the Sunni community, 

and also Shia community, there were Shia Baathists, we tend to 

forget that, fled.  Are those people coming back?  On the whole, 

no, they're not coming back.  Will they?  It remains to be seen.  

What’s going on is the formation of a new government in Iraq.  It 

certainly was set back by mistakes that we made early on, the 

excessively harsh de-Baathification policy.  On the other hand, 

there is an analogy to the de-Nazification strategy after World 

War II, and there was a lot of controversy about that.  If you want 

the people who will administer the country efficiently, then going 

back to some of the people who were involved in the previous 

dictatorship might make sense.  Although I would point out that 

that was the most corrupt and inefficient and ineffective 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 41. 

 

 

 

dictatorships that there has ever been at everything except 

keeping itself in power and threatening its neighbors.  And so it’s 

not as though there was exactly good governance in Iraq before 

2003, and it’s not as though there was a large cadre of 

government officials in Iraq before 2003 who you would have 

wanted to see in senior positions now.  Nevertheless, excessive 

de-Baathification set the process back.  What we are seeing now 

is the construction of a new Iraqi society.  This will take a long 

time.  And I think part of the problem that we have in this 

discussion is that we tend to conflate the question, are we 

winning, with the question, have we won?  The truth of the 

matter is, we are winning in the sense that, we respect, Sir 

Malcolm, not just in the matter of military arena, but in respect 

to politics, and also now finally economic development, we are 

moving in the right direction, we do see the formation of an Iraqi 

bureaucratic class.  We do see the development of Iraqi 

technocrats, small in number, ineffective in some respects, still 

learning the ropes as they develop a new system, but we are 

making progress.  We will have achieved, when we have achieved 

the aim of working this all out, we won't be winning, we will have 

won.   

JACK KEANE 

Let me add to that.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 42. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN 

Jack Keane.   

JACK KEANE 

Because some of you may be thinking about that.  When we talk 

about a long struggle in Iraq, we do not mean a long troop 

presence in Iraq.  All of us believe, strongly, that we will reduce 

our forces in 2009, we’ll even more dramatically reduce them in 

2010, and I have held the view, if you put Maliki’s number on the 

table, number and date on the table with Obama’s, McCain’s, 

and Petraeus’s, they wouldn't be that far apart.  And I think 

that’s where we are, to be quite frank about it.  In terms of our 

combat forces coming out.  Because their presence is needed 

right now to see through the political process, to make certain 

that these provincial elections are not maligned, and to make 

certain that the national election is not maligned.  We don’t have 

those large forces there because of the insurgency or because of 

the al Qaeda.   We want to make certain that the political process 

is moving forward, and the US and coalition presence in Iraq has 

been the glue that has been holding things together.  It is a myth 

that has been perpetuated, and people who perpetuate it don’t 

know the Iraqis when they say, by pulling our forces away, 

somehow that would be a catalyst and a call to action for the 

Iraqis to do something that they're not capable of doing while 

we’re there.  We have been the catalyst and the glue that have 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 43. 

 

 

 

helped them, and our presence has been very important.  And 

that presence is going to dramatically change in terms--it already 

has in terms of casualties, that’ll continue to go down to almost 

nothing.  And also the numbers of our troops will dramatically go 

down over time as well.  I just want to clear that up, where you 

have long term political objectives in Iraq, that does not mean 

that we’re going to have combat troops in Iraq fighting in Iraq for 

years to come.  

JOHN DONVAN  

Sir Malcolm, I see you taking notes on that, do you want to 

respond?   

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND  

Well, I think that there are always going to be good consequences 

of bad wars, just as there are sometimes bad consequences of 

good wars.  What you’ve got to do is come to an honest 

judgement as to where the balance lies.  Have the sacrifices been 

worthwhile, of the Iraq people, of the American people, of the 

coalition forces, but particularly of the Iraqis.  Is the net effect of 

this terrible five years something that was worth doing in the first 

place?  If the answer is, no, it wasn’t, then the fact that there 

have been some benefits, sure, that always happens even in the 

worst wars for the worst reasons.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Your comment on sacrifices raises for me the question of the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 44. 

 

 

 

price that has been paid in blood.  And I want to ask, with as 

much sensitivity as possible, and as much honor for the families 

of those who have lost soldiers, Charles Ferguson, did those men 

die for nothing?   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

I think it’s worse than that, I think it’s much worse than that.  I 

think that history is going to record George Bush as one of the 

most horrifically arrogant, rigid, stupid, inhumane morons we 

have ever… [APPLAUSE]  It, look, in my film, six minutes into my 

film there is a clip of a very intelligent, honest, accomplished man 

who was the chairman of the National Intelligence Council from 

2003 to 2005.  And the first thing that he says is that what he 

found the most revealing, he began, on his own initiative, not 

asked by the administration, not asked by the President, he 

began performing intelligence estimates of the insurgency.  And 

he gave them to the highest level of the administration.  And he 

said that what he found most revealing was that President Bush 

not only had not read the estimate, but had not even read the 

one page executive summary.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Would victory vindicate those deaths.   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

Victory would.  In 1972, when he was first visiting China, Henry 

Kissinger asked Zhou Enlai whether in Zhou Enlai’s view the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 45. 

 

 

 

French Revolution had been a success.  And Zhou Enlai’s 

response was, it’s too early to tell.  Now, by that standard, maybe 

we’re winning.  

JOHN DONVAN 

Fred Kagan, can you take on the question of the sacrifice?   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

I’d actually like to surprise the audience by agreeing with the last 

remark that Mr. Ferguson made.  It is too soon to tell.  If we win 

the war, then the sacrifice will not have been in vain.  I think it’s 

fair to say that no soldier who sacrifices his life, or her life for 

their country, makes a vain sacrifice.  But, and I dislike that, I 

don’t think that that’s really the issue, because I don’t think that 

the nature of the sacrifice should be bound up with our 

judgements about whether the war is successful or not.  It is too 

soon to tell.  The funny thing about a war is that it’s not over 

until it’s over, and what seems like a good idea in year one can 

seem like a very bad idea in year three, can seem like a very good 

idea in year ten, can seem like a very bad idea in year fifty.  And 

that’s why you can't make a permanent decision and stamp it in 

stone as those speaking against the motion would basically like 

to do.  They’d like to say, this, the sum cost in this war is so high 

that nothing that could conceivably happen would be worth it, 

therefore the war was a failure, and lost.  And Bush is a word 

that I can't use on the air.  And the problem is the story doesn't 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 46. 

 

 

 

end there.  The question is, what will happen in the years to 

come, and we don’t know.  Right now it appears to me that the 

trends are positive to have quite a profound impact on the Middle 

East.  And what impresses me is that it is Iraqis who are engaged 

in this process actively, who are saying so.  And this isn’t—I’m 

not talking about Ahmed Chalabi and other folks like that who’ve 

been discredited.  I’m talking about people who are actually 

engaged day to day, in running their country.  This is what 

they’re saying.  If that is in fact the case and I think that it is, 

then, not only will those deaths not have been in vain as—as no 

military deaths are, but they will have served a tremendous 

interest of the United States of America and the world.    

JOHN DONVAN  

Gentlemen—  [APPLAUSE]  Question from the audience.    

ED THOMPSON 

I’m Ed Thompson with the Ayn Rand Institute.  I find Sir 

Malcolm’s assertion, that, because they are Iraqis or Arabs, that 

there will be violence, I find that a racist statement.  I feel 

compelled to point out—  I’ll get to that.  I feel compelled to point 

out that it was the Iraqi troops that went into Bosnia, to clean up 

the mess that was left behind by the British troops.   Now…  The 

question that I have is how the opposition can deny or ignore the 

evidence of the proponents that we’re winning the war…and state 

that, Iraq will fall into disarray when the, when the Americans 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 47. 

 

 

 

leave, when…  Mr. Kagan states, that Iraq will be a—it’ll be a 

watershed situation, that Iraq will be a rival to Saudi Arabia 

because it’s a democracy.   Now, the question really is, what 

makes you think that, Sir Rifkind, what makes you think that 

Iraq will fall into violence, as opposed to becoming a civilized 

country, like some of the other Middle Eastern states such as the 

US—UAE, Kuwait, and—    

JOHN DONVAN  

I’m gonna cut you off because I think the question is clear.  Sir 

Malcolm, I think the question if I can—    

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND 

I think you clearly misunderstood what I said and that may have 

been my fault and I’m sorry if you did.  But at no time do I 

suggest that the Iraqis as a people, as a culture are any more 

prone to violence than anybody of any ethnic background.  What 

I did say, is that if you go into somebody else’s country, who has 

not attacked you, if you remove their government and if you 

destroy their political system, then you create a political vacuum.   

And in the circumstances of Iraq, where rightly or wrongly, the 

Sunni minority had had power, not just under Saddam Hussein, 

for a hundred, 200 years, and the Shia majority suddenly see an 

opportunity to assert power, and the Sunni seeing that they’re 

losing it resist that, you get effectively a civil war.   And when 

you, as a result of having created this political vacuum, you give 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 48. 

 

 

 

people like al-Qaeda an opportunity to get in on the act, 

encouraging separatist violence, helping mosques being blown up 

in order to get people  to commit acts of revenge in return, then 

you get all the terrible trauma, of what has happened in Iraq.    

 

Now I do not say that that is the direct responsibility of the 

American or the British governments, of course, they were not 

responsible for violence committed by al-Qaeda, or by Sunni or 

by Shia.  What I do say, is that that explosion of violence which 

has led to tens of thousands if not hundreds of thousands of 

terrible deaths, simply would not have happened, if the foolish 

decision to go to war had not been taken in the first place.    

JOHN DONVAN  

Sir Malcolm, Fred Kagan—   

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND 

And so ultimately, we have that responsibility—   

JOHN DONVAN 

Fred Kagan would like to jump in on that.   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

I’d just like to make a point that has been lost in this discussion 

so far which is to begin with, there was a small al-Qaeda 

presence in Iraq before 2003, that’s an established fact.  Abu 

Musab al-Zarkawi was already in Baghdad in 2002.  I do not 

regard that as sufficient justification for invading Iraq, I don’t 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 49. 

 

 

 

think that.  I’m not trying to make that case, I am stating a fact 

that there was an al-Qaeda presence in Iraq before we invaded.  

Al-Qaeda then took advantage of our failed strategy and our 

inappropriate methods and the variety of the mistakes that have 

been highlighted here, repeatedly, to seize control in Anbar 

Province, and areas of Ninewa and particularly Salahaddin 

Province and areas of Diyala and of course Baghdad.    

 

What has been lost, is that, Iraq is now the first place in the 

Muslim world, where a Sunni Arab population, that had 

embraced and supported al-Qaeda and provided fighters to its 

ranks, rose up against al-Qaeda, joined with the military of the 

United States of America,  fought tooth and nail to defeat the 

insurgents, threw them out of their country, and now you can 

hardly find an Iraqi anywhere, who will say anything other than, 

al-Qaeda are foreigners, they’re evil, they’re bad people and we 

will never let them back into our country.   If you want to talk 

about effects in the war on terror, this is an unintended 

consequence…let us say.  It’s not as though there was an al-

Qaeda group in Iraq that was large that we went in and defeated.  

However.  If you watch what the jihadis say, if you watch the al-

Qaeda websites, nothing that has happened in the past seven 

years has distressed them more, with the exception of losing 

Afghanistan initially—  Nothing has distressed them more than 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 50. 

 

 

 

the awakening movement in Iraq which they see as a mortal  

threat to the success of their ideological movement within the 

Muslim world, and I think it’s very important to recognize that.    

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Fred—  That was Fred Kagan, speaking for the 

motion.  I’m John Donvan, this is Intelligence Squared US, 

Oxford-style debating, on America’s shores, we have four 

panelists on the program.   Two for, and two against the 

proposition, “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq.”  We are 

in our mix-it-up section in which we are taking questions from 

the audience, and I understand that we have an Iraqi war vet 

who’s had his hand up for some time far in the back.  Sir, the mic 

is yours.    

JOSE VASQUEZ 

Thank you.  My name’s Jose Vasquez, I’m a former staff sergeant, 

US Army, I’m also a member—thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  I’m also a 

member of Iraq Veterans Against the War, my organization just 

recently published a series of testimonies called Winter Soldiers:  

Iraq and Afghanistan—Eyewitness Accounts of the Occupations.  

Over 150 members came forward to testify about things like—   

JOHN DONVAN 

I need a question from you—   

JOSE VASQUEZ 

—indiscriminate fire, into civilian occupied areas, ongoing 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 51. 

 

 

 

torture, and corporate pillaging, my question for the folks that are 

for the motion is, given the systemic nature of these types of 

atrocities, do the panelists for the motion support a military 

victory at the price of moral and legal failure.  Is that victory at 

all.  Thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JACK KEANE 

The—the factual basis of atrocities which exist in all wars, as it 

pertains to Iraq, are far lower than any experience that the 

United States or Western countries have normally had in wars in 

the past, and, to—  I’m not suggesting they don’t exist, they exist.  

The difference is this also.  Is that, when the United States and 

its Western allies, when their soldiers do wrong and harm others, 

there’s accountability for that.  Those soldiers and those leaders 

that are involved in that, are brought very quickly into a judicial 

process for accountability, that’s what a democracy does, and 

that’s what we have always been doing throughout our history, 

we’re not perfect in this.   But it’s certainly, that is, the realistic 

issue here is the fact that they have been committed, but they are 

much lower than our experience has been on a per-capita basis, 

and always, there’s been accountability for that horror when it’s 

inflicted and when the chain of command is, is made aware of 

it—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 52. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN 

All right, General—   

JACK KEANE  

and it ignores the overwhelming good and sacrifice and 

compassion, that we have seen our soldiers display on a day-to-

day basis, on the one, one moment…putting their life right on the 

line for Iraqi families and Iraqi citizenry, and then in the next 

moment, having tremendous compassion, and helping and 

assisting them with—   

JOHN DONVAN  

General, with due respect—   

JACK KEANE 

—the values of the country—   

JOHN DONVAN 

—to your passion on that and to the question itself, it’s actually 

off our point of whether the US is winning the war in Iraq and I 

would like to get back to that point with a question from the 

woman—   

DINA TEMPLE-RASTON 

Hello, I’m Dina Temple-Raston with National Public Radio.  And I 

wanted to quibble a little bit with your version of events in Basra.  

Muqtada al-Sadr’s forces there weren’t defeated.  I was there for 

NPR reporting at the time.   And the Mahdi army just 

disappeared.  Al-Sadr told them to disappear, and they left with 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 53. 

 

 

 

their guns.  And we really haven’t seen much of them since.  On 

the same point, similarly, there are enormous issues right now 

surrounding the Sons of Iraq.   And the ability of the Iraqi 

government to fold them into the Iraqi army, and pay them as the 

Americans have.  So—  

JOHN DONVAN 

And your question is—   

DINA TEMPLE-RASTON 

My question is…how can you say America is winning the war in 

Iraq when we have these two enormous problems that have been 

left unresolved, Muqtada al-Sadr, and the Awakening 

Commission.  And, how do you suggest we tackle these problems 

going forward.  And aren’t they just waiting us out?    

JOHN DONVAN  

Fred Kagan, for the motion.    

FREDERICK KAGAN 

With due respect, I don’t denigrate what you saw when you were 

there, but I have also spoken with many people who participated 

in that operation, shortly after it occurred.  And they did not 

simply disappear.  Many of them were killed.  And, many of them 

particularly in Sadr City where they fought harder, were killed.   

And many of their top leaders were killed, which is one of the key 

reasons why they broke.  And if you look at what is actually going 

on within the Shia community now, and you look at what Sadr 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 54. 

 

 

 

has done, and you ask the question, are there Sadrist networks 

that remain in Iraq, the answer is, of course there are.  Then the 

next question, will they take Sadr’s order, if Sadr tells them to 

rise up again and do this or do that or the other thing, and what 

we have seen repeatedly is, the answer is, yes and no, but 

increasingly more no than yes.   For the excellent reason that 

they have come to fear, not only the American military, but also 

the Iraqi army.  And, there was an interesting and very poignant 

moment, when some of those— actually I think it was probably 

Iranian special groups rather than Sadrists who did this—spray-

painted on a bridge, across the border into Iran, “We’ll be back.”   

 

And the Iraqi army, Iraqi army soldiers spray-painted right under 

it, “We’ll be waiting.”  And that message has gone out.  And so I’m 

sorry, it simply is not the case that Sadr is just waiting us out, 

Sadr’s son has said for the moment it may rise again, he’s a 

young man, we’ll see.  What will not happen, is that you will have 

an uprising on the scale of 2004, 2005 or even 2006 when the 

Sadrists were poised to take control of the country.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Sir Malcolm, I—   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

That’s not [UNCLEAR]—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 55. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN  

—I hear in that response an answer to your point earlier, well, 

maybe they’re just lying low, and insurgents rise and fall again, 

what about that, Fred Kagan is saying he thinks this is 

permanent, it’s gonna last, or very likely to last.    

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND 

I think it is entirely possible that the insurgency will 

permanently, slowly, come to an end.  We’re not there yet, there 

is a lot of truth in the argument that Muqtada al-Sadr is simply 

biding his time.  But he’s weaker than he was in the past.  And if 

that is happening, if the insurgency is being brought under 

control—I would welcome that, any reasonable person would 

welcome that.  But that doesn’t mean we’ve won the war.  To win 

the war, or to be even winning the war, means we are 

approaching the stage where we can say this whole operation was 

worthwhile.  The last five years was right and justified.  That’s a 

very different question.   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

May I make a brief comment about this?  

JOHN DONVAN 

Charles Ferguson.   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

Look, it is possible that Iraq will stabilize and the insurgency will, 

fall away gradually.  However, this idea, this portrait of an 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 56. 

 

 

 

incipient paradise that Mr. Kagan paints is unfortunately just not 

right.  There are enormous tensions still inside Iraq.  There’s a 

three-way, at least a three-way—   

JOHN DONVAN  

Charles, with respect, I haven’t heard as the moderator Fred 

Kagan promise an incipient paradise—   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

Fair enough—   

JOHN DONVAN 

Right—   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

—excuse me.  I, fair enough, I retract that and I apologize to Mr. 

Kagan.  But—   

JOHN DONVAN 

Or even anything close.    

CHARLES FERGUSON 

Also fair enough.  [LAUGHTER]  But the idea that we are reaching 

and it’s within sight that we have a stable situation in Iraq, 

simply is not true.  There are enormous tensions over Kirkuk, 

which could erupt into military conflict.  That issue remains 

entirely unresolved.  There’s at least a three-way, possibly a four- 

or five- or six-way, fight among various Shiite groups for control 

of the south including Basra.  It is true that the Sadrist 

movement remains fairly strong.  The integration of the roughly 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 57. 

 

 

 

hundred thousand Sunni Awakening Council concerned citizens, 

uh, members, into the security forces and into Iraqi society 

remains extremely unclear and uncertain and is largely being 

forced by the Americans onto an extremely unwilling central 

government.   So, it’s not—this country remains very fragile, and 

none of the proposals for withdrawing American troops have 

envisioned anything more than a withdrawal of roughly one-third 

of total US forces.  Withdrawing all US combat forces would 

withdraw only about 25 percent of total US forces in the area, not 

even counting the private military contractors.    

JOHN DONVAN  

Charles Ferguson, thank you, we’re gonna go to another question 

in the rear?    

ROSS SANDLER 

My name is Ross Sandler, I’d like to look to the future a bit, and 

ask both groups…what events or circumstances or milestones or 

trends would cause you to moderate your view.   

JOHN DONVAN 

I love that question.  And it’s—  [LAUGHTER]  And it’s what I 

asked before of Charles, what would be victory, when—when 

would you say, well I might’ve been wrong, it’s working out.  Or 

the reverse, I might’ve been wrong, it’s not working out, Jack 

Keane.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 58. 

 

 

 

JACK KEANE 

Well, I’ll start it off.  One is the Provincial Election Law itself, 

which was the most crucial in our view, because it’s decentralized 

government and it’s empowering people at local levels, and 

there’s a lot of that there right now, but now it’ll be formalized 

and it’ll be a structure for them to vote for, and a structure for 

them to receive budget money from as well.  That’s number one.   

Certainly, there’s issues that surround the Kurds.  There’s Article 

140, I don’t wanna get into the details of it because we don’t have 

enough time.  And that is of a concern for us in the future, we’re 

not—Fred and I are not suggesting that there are not challenges 

ahead in Iraq—of course there are.   But the good news that we 

are bringing to you is that there’s been significant progress here, 

and we’ve moved into another phase.  We’re moving out of a 

security phase into a political phase, where people are using the 

political process to address their grievances as opposed to armed 

violence, and that’s what we have to be hopeful for.   I don’t think 

that could be turned back easily.  And certainly, the second thing 

that would concern me are the Iranians themselves, they are up 

to huge mischief here.  This is of significant strategic interest, 

their number-one strategic interest in Iraq, is the removal of the 

United States.  They want a weak central government in Iraq, so 

that they can have influence over that government.  And that is 

their strategic interest when it pertains to Iraq, not the region 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 59. 

 

 

 

itself.  Brigadier General Suleimani, who was the Quds force 

commander, who engineered the operation in Iraq, in southern 

Iraq on behalf of the Iranians, he is the Quds force commander, 

who defeated the Israelis in southern Lebanon.  He has been in 

his position over 10 years.  He is intelligent, experienced, and 

ruthless.  He works for one person, and one person only, and 

that’s the Supreme Leader of Iraq.  Of Iran, excuse me.  Despite 

the major setback that we have had in the south, for that leader 

and for his forces, his proxy forces, he is still in command.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Sir Malcolm—   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Which tells me, that they have not given up on their strategic 

objective.  We believe because of the anti-Iranian attitude that is 

in the south among its people, and the—and their commitment to 

move to a greater Iraq, aligned with the United States, that we 

will be okay.  But if you ask me, am I concerned about it, I am, 

because of their determination.  Could it change things in Iraq? It 

could.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Sir Malcolm.   

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND 

General Keane rightly says that the Iranians have a strategic 

objective of wanting to see a very weak Iraqi government, in order 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 60. 

 

 

 

that Iran will be the unrivaled power in the region.  He 

conveniently forgets or ignores, that Iraq did have a very strutting 

central government, not just under Saddam Hussein, but for the 

last 50 years under successive Iraqi governments.   It is because 

of the war, that he is supporting, that Iraq as a strong centralized 

state has been destroyed, and that Iraq today has exactly that 

weak, decentralized government, with a Kurdish autonomous 

region in the north, with the Shia and Sunni constantly battling 

for influence and power, and with the central government having 

little real power, that is exactly what the Iranians wanted to 

achieve, and it is American and British policy that has helped 

them achieve it.    

JOHN DONVAN  

Sir Malcolm, are you saying that the war makes victory 

impossible?   

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND 

I am saying that the only way in which you can test whether 

victory has been achieved, is not to simply look at whether the 

insurgency is going up or going down, as if the—the war is simply 

about the insurgency.  The war is about the invasion of Iraq, the 

destruction of a regime, the creation of a political vacuum, and 

whether the overall effects of that strategy, pursued by America, 

by Britain, and by the coalition, whether that has been net plus 

for the Iraqis and for the region, or whether it has been a net 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 61. 

 

 

 

minus.    

JOHN DONVAN  

Fred Kagan.   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

I’d like to take a minute to address one of the historical myths 

that seems to me to be embedded in this backward-looking 

definition of whether we’re winning or not.   Which is, how exactly 

was Iraq doing in the 1990s after the liberation of Kuwait which 

was generally agreed to be a good war, led to an international-

sanctions regime, led to an oil-for-food program that became 

incredibly corrupt, not only on the Iraqi side which was to be 

expected, with Saddam Hussein, but also on the UN side 

unfortunately.   Which created significant problems, and I’ve 

heard Iraqis explain to me, even now, some of the problems that 

are persistent in the corruption that you see in Iraq date back to 

structures and practices that were established under the oil-for-

food program.   Iraq was not exactly a wonderful buffer against 

Iran in the 1990s when we, the United States and Great Britain 

were compelled to maintain forces which looked like forever, in 

that circumstance, conducting overflight and periodically 

bombing Iraq.   And there was no end in sight to that particularly 

either, now, if you think that this war is going to drag on and be 

miserable for decades obviously it was preferable to do what we 

were doing in the ‘90s than that.  If you think that there’s a 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 62. 

 

 

 

prospect as I do of actual success, then, this is something that 

can end, in a way that that wasn’t, but the notion that we were 

the ones who destroyed in 2003 a very effective system of dual 

containment I think is problematic.   But I’d like to answer the 

question that was asked, because it’s an excellent question.  And 

I think as an analytical matter, it’s something that’s very 

important to put on the table, and I’m willing to put this on the 

table, and I’m willing to be judged against this and you can throw 

this up to me two or three years hence, and we can talk about 

whether it worked out.   What would make me change my mind 

about the analysis?  To begin with, I already changed my mind.  

As I told you, I had been fairly pessimistic going into the passage 

of the provincial election law.  I’ve changed my view as a result of 

that.  If the provincial elections are not held, are not seen to be 

legitimate, or badly marred by violence, that will be a very 

negative indicator, and it will make me revise my view.  If the 

subsequent Council of Representative elections are not held, are 

not seen to be legitimate, or badly marred by violence, that will be 

a very important negative indicator.  If the Sunni Arab 

community in Iraq decides that it is not going to participate in 

the political process in these elections, in subsequent elections, 

or in any way thereafter, that will be an extremely negative 

indicator, and we’ll have to revise our view.  If the Iranian backed 

and controlled special groups are able to reestablish themselves 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 63. 

 

 

 

in a coherent fashion through the country and conduct the sort 

of coherent, widespread campaigns that they were able to 

conduct before the surge, that will be a negative indicator.  If a 

Sunni-Arab insurgency reforms coherently to conduct large scale 

attacks, and I'm distinguishing that, because I'm not claiming 

that Iraq will be a paradise.  There will continue to be violence, 

there will continue to be inter-sectarian violence, there will 

continue to be ethnic violence, and there will continue to be 

terrorism.  The question is, is there a coherent enemy 

organization on the Sunni or Shia side running it.  If al Qaeda 

actually returned and reestablished significant safe havens, I 

would say that that was an extremely, uh, negative indicator. And 

lastly, if large scale, as distinct from periodic, as I say, smaller 

scale violence and terrorism, if large scale violence between 

Kurds and Arabs erupts, that will be a very negative indicator.  

Right now I would say I'm most concerned about the elections, 

about their legitimacy, particularly of the COR elections, after 

we’ve drawn down even more forces.  I think the reestablishment 

of special, Iranian Baath special groups, is ongoing, and we will 

have to see how that plays out.  The other, other indicators right 

now seem to me to be pretty positive.  But I think that’s, those 

are the things that I would look at to evaluate as we move 

forward.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 64. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Fred Kagan.  And that concludes our Q&A section.  I 

want to remind you once again of the numbers.  We’re going to 

take the final vote very shortly, and we would really like you, 

because it’s establishing our base line, to stay and vote, and we’ll 

have the results very quickly.  All four of these people have 

argued very strenuously, and we would like to register, to the 

extent possible, every single, every single mind up there in the 

seats.  Reminding you that, coming in, twenty percent of you, 

with the motion, “America is finally winning the war in Iraq,” 

twenty percent of you were for the motion, fifty-four percent of 

you were against the motion, and twenty-six percent, nearly a 

quarter, more than a quarter of you were undecided.  We’re now 

going to move to final statements by each of the panelists.  These 

statements last for two minutes each, and once again the bell will 

single time being up.  And the first to wrap up…  The first 

speaker to offer a summary statement will be Charles Ferguson, 

director and producer of the award winning Iraq War 

documentary No End in Sight.  Charles Ferguson.   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

Thank you very much.  Let me begin my concluding remarks by 

answering the last question that was asked about what would 

constitute victory, as has already, I think, been made clear, Sir 

Malcolm and myself both share the view that we’ve long passed 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 65. 

 

 

 

the point at which anything approaching victory really is 

achievable.  But let’s suppose for the moment that we magically 

forget about all the damage done, and we simply focus on 

starting at this moment.  If it were possible for all US troops, not 

just the twenty-five percent that are combat troops, all US troops 

to return from Iraq, for that to occur with Iraq remaining stable, 

and without further violence: if the five million Iraq internally 

displaced persons and external refugees then returned to Iraq, 

also without violence: if Iran abandoned its pursuit of nuclear 

weapons, and if Iraq gets just to number one hundred and fifty in 

the corruption index, I would consider that we would have made 

enormous progress.  Nobody believes these things are going to 

occur.  Nobody.  Nobody.  Let me unfortunately conclude with an 

email message I received a few days before my film was happily 

nominated for an Academy Award by someone who had seen the 

film:  My son, Noah Charles Pierce, served two tours in Iraq, and 

in your film you showed a scene of kids throwing rocks at trucks, 

and you can hear the soldiers wanting to shoot the kids.  Which 

is true.  Shortly after the invasion, my son was in Baghdad, 

cleaning up the dead civilians who were being pelted, while being 

pelted with rocks.  The kids grew braver and became more 

effective until orders came down to shoot them.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Charles, I'm sorry, I have to cut you off.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 66. 

 

 

 

CHARLES FERGUSON 

I'm sorry, I'm going to finish.  

JOHN DONVAN 

I'm sorry, I have to— 

CHARLES FERGUSON 

The soldiers gunned them down— 

JOHN DONVAN  

Charles, I'm sorry, I have to cut you off— 

CHARLES FERGUSON 

…last July my son committed suicide— 

JOHN DONVAN 

I'm sorry, I'm sorry.  Was that the end.  Well, since I talked all 

over it, and the audience is saying let you finish it, read the last 

sentence again.   

CHARLES FERGUSON 

OK.  My son watched in terror as his fellow soldiers gunned them 

down.  Last July my son shot himself.  I'm sorry, that's it.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Charles Ferguson.  Summing up for the motion, General Jack 

Keane, a retired four star general, and former Vice Chief of Staff 

of the US Army, a member of the Secretary of Defense’s policy 

board, summing up for the motion, “America is finally winning 

the war in Iraq.”   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 67. 

 

 

 

JACK KEANE 

As we’ve tried to indicate, Iraq, we’ve tried not to re-fight the 

beginning of the war in Iraq, because that was not the purpose 

here.  We’ll also have opinions about that ourselves.  And we 

have admitted openly that we had a failed strategy in Iraq for 

three plus years.  But we do have a winning strategy now.  And I 

look at Iraq as an opportunity.  It is clearly in the United States’ 

national interest to have an Arab Muslim country with a duly 

elected democratic government aligned with the United States in 

a region of the world, like it or not, that we will spend the next 

thirty to fifty years involved in.  And it will continue to be 

ideological and serious struggles there.  This is a step forward for 

the national security interests of the American people to have 

that kind of a relationship with a stable government.  We are not 

there yet, but the signs are clearly there, and they were not there 

in the past.  And with the investments that we are making in 

resources, and in, certainly with our soldiers’ commitment, and 

yes, with their lives, that is absolutely worth the sacrifice, in my 

judgement, in terms of the security of the United States, and 

what that region, that troubled region of the world will be.  There 

is not a single Sunni Arab state that surrounds Iraq that will not 

change as a result of the stable, duly-elected democratic 

government in that country.  And the Iranians will have to 

change and be influenced by it as well.  And that is the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 68. 

 

 

 

opportunity that is in front of us, and that is why we are so 

committed to it.  And regardless of all the mistakes in the past, 

that is in front of us right now.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, General Keane.  [APPLAUSE]  Summarizing his 

position against the motion, Sir Malcolm Rifkind, former foreign 

secretary, and a former defense secretary of the United Kingdom.  

Sir Malcolm?   

SIR MALCOLM RIFKIND  

General Keane has just said that in his view what might be 

achieved in Iraq is worth the sacrifice that has been made.  I 

think you know that’s a very easy challenge to test.  I think we 

just have to ask ourselves if five years ago we had known that by 

going to war over a hundred thousand Iraqis would die, two 

million would be refugees in other countries, the internal 

economy would collapse, the Sunni and  Shia communities would 

get into Sectarian conflict, and we would have helped make Iran 

the real power in the Gulf, would we have thought that achieving 

an Iraq government, which was elected, but which is not a true 

democracy yet and may never be, that that was on balance a 

sacrifice worth making?  I don’t believe that the hundred 

thousand Iraqis who have died, or their families who have 

survived them, will believe it was a sacrifice worth making.  Iran 

is the real winner of this conflict.  The Iraqi people have been the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 69. 

 

 

 

losers.  The fact that they may now have a government which is 

better than Saddam Hussein, but what a terrible price they have 

paid for it.  And we know that we’re not going to invade any other 

country knowing what now know happens when you carry out 

such a strategy as you have carried out in Iraq.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Thank you, Sir Malcolm.  [APPLAUSE]  Finally, summing up for 

the motion, “America is finally winning the war in Iraq,” resident 

scholar in defense and security studies at the American 

Enterprise Institute, Fred Kagan.   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

Thank you.  I’d like to start by noting for the record that a 

number of people left, and I have psychic abilities, and I know 

that all of those people would now vote for the proposition, and I 

hope that their votes will be counted.  [LAUGHS] Look, vote 

however you want to vote…  Let me step back from that for a 

minute and just say, this issue is too important for us to 

continue to be the bird that flies backwards, always looking at 

where it was, and never looking to where it’s going.  And I'm 

deeply distressed by the tendency in our political class, our 

political discourse, and unfortunately the presidential race as 

well, to focus again and again on re-fighting mistakes that every 

single person up here agrees were made. And every single person 

up here criticized.  The issue is not did we make mistakes.  The 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 70. 

 

 

 

issue is, where are we now, and where are we headed?  And that 

is what we need to focus on as a nation, because the world will 

not stop and stand still while we flagellate ourselves, or as some 

of us flagellate others, for mistakes that were made, and we 

cannot go through the entirely self-referential exercise of beating 

ourselves up for what we did wrong, and assume that the world 

will wait till we get through that, and then do something.  The 

stakes are too high, and we can't have a conversation like that.  

As for effect on the region, let me simply end with a little story.  I 

went to the border post opposite Mehran, which has a major 

Quds Force base in Iran.  And I stood on the border and I spoke 

with an American officer who, every day, met with and spoke to 

some of the tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of Iranian 

pilgrims who come to Iraq every day to go to the holy shrines of 

Najaf and Karbala, and in Baghdad.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Fred, I have to cut you off, you have ten seconds.   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

OK.  They say three things to him— 

JOHN DONVAN 

No, I’ve got to give you ten seconds.   

FREDERICK KAGAN 

This is ten seconds.  Thank you, we love America, and come visit 

us soon. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 71. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Fred Kagan.  [APPLAUSE]  So now we see how this 

turned out.  Once again we’d like you to turn to the keypads that 

are by each of your seats, and reminding you what our motion is, 

“America is finally winning the war in Iraq.”  If you support the 

motion press number one, if you are against the motion press 

number two, if you remain undecided press number three.  And 

within a few seconds, actually, we will have the results.  As they 

are being calculated, I want to remind you of what’s coming down 

the road.  First of all, I want to thank all of you in the audience 

for really excellent questions.  I apologize to the numbers of 

people, there was a forest of hands up, to the numbers of you 

who were not able to ask your questions.  But I just want to ask 

you to settle down just a little bit.  Our next debate will be 

Tuesday, October 28th, the motion is: “Guns reduce crime.”  

Panelists for the motion are Stephen Halbrook, who has won 

three Supreme Court cases on firearm law issues, and who 

represents the NRA in several lawsuits, Gary Kleck, a professor in 

the college of criminology and criminal justice at Florida State 

University, and a lifelong Democrat who was once on the other 

side of this debate, and John Lott, a senior research scholar at 

the University of Maryland who believes we would be safer is 

people carried concealed weapons.  Panelists against the motion, 

John Donohue, a professor at Yale Law School, whose statistical 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “America is Finally Winning the War in Iraq” (10/7/08) Page 72. 

 

 

 

research focuses on the death penalty and employment 

discrimination, Paul Helmke, president of the Brady Campaign 

and Brady Center to prevent gun violence, as well as a 

Republican and former mayor of Fort Wayne, Indiana, and finally 

Seattle Chief of Police, R. Gil Kerlikowske, who in a thirty-six year 

career in law enforcement has been a patrol officer, a narcotics 

and robbery detective, and a hostage negotiator.  These debates, 

as we’ve said before, can be heard on more than a hundred fifty 

NPR stations across the nation, just check your local NPR 

member station listings for the dates and times of broadcast.  We 

also want to remind you that copies of books by the authors, as 

well as DVD’s of previous Intelligence Squared US Debates are 

available on sale in the lobby.  Ah, interesting, we’ve had some 

movement.  Before the debate, to remind you, twenty percent 

were for the motion, fifty-four percent were against, and twenty-

six percent were undecided.  The motion for moved more of you, 

thirty-six percent are now for the motion, fifty-three percent are 

against, eleven percent remain undecided.  So, while the majority 

view remains against, more people’s minds were changed by the 

course of this debate in support of the motion, “America is finally 

winning the war in Iraq.”  [APPLAUSE]  Thank you for attending, 

we’ll see you at the next Intelligence Squared debate, and thank 

you to our panel.   

END 


