
 
MEDIA TRANSCRIPTS, INC. 

41 WEST 83rd STREET  NEW YORK, N.Y.  10024   (212)  362-1481 

 

FOR Intelligence Squared US/  

The Rosenkranz Foundation 

590 Madison Avenue, 30th Floor 

New York, NY 10022 

DATE 3/17/09 

BLAME WASHINGTON MORE THAN WALL STREET FOR THE  
FINANCIAL CRISIS 
Moderator:                 John Donvan 

For the motion:          Niall Ferguson, John Steele Gordon, Nouriel Roubini 

Against the motion:  Alex Berenson, Jim Chanos, Nell Minow 

 
RESULTS 

Before the debate:                                                  

For the motion:  42% 

Against the motion:  30% 

Undecided:  28% 

 

After the debate: 

For the motion:  60% 

Against the motion:  31% 

Undecided:  9% 

 
 

ROBERT ROSENKRANZ 

[APPLAUSE] Thank you, thank you very much, it’s a pleasure to 

welcome you.  It’s my role in these evening’s to try to frame the 

debate, give the reasons why we thought this was a worthwhile 

topic.  Let me start out by saying—just giving you a fact—in 

2006, which was the last year before the financial crisis started 

to unfold, financial companies earned about 43% of all the profits 

earned by the Standard & Poor’s 500.  Well that seems 

extraordinary when you think about the size of the financial 

sector.  And how is that possible?  Well it turns out that those 

profits were to a large degree illusory.  It was almost like there 

was a giant Ponzi scheme going on, where financial institutions 

were selling assets to each other at ever ever higher prices, ever 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 2. 

 

 

 

ever greater degrees of leverage.  And among those assets were 

about 6 trillion dollars in structured securities.  Structured 

securities business is a construct of the ratings agencies, who 

through the alchemy of their own logic have turned the dross of 

subprime mortgages and other dodgy credits into the gold of 

Triple A securities.  The big 5 investment banking firms at the 

beginning of 2007 had total assets of 4.3 trillion dollars.  To put 

that into perspective, the national budget of the United States in 

those years was about 3 trillion dollars.  They were leveraged 

greater than 30 to 1.  Their assets were long-term in nature, 

frequently quite risky, frequently illiquid, and they were financed 

with mostly liabilities payable on demand.  Most of the 

managements of these institutions were completely incapable of 

managing the risks that their firms were assuming.   

 

Now turning to the commercial banks, think about Chuck Prince,  

the CEO of Citicorp.  He ignored the storm warnings as he 

steered Citicorp onto the rocks with his infamous quote, “As long 

as the music is playing, you’ve got to get up and dance.”    

 

Okay, so why blame Washington for this mess?  Well, there are a 

number of plausible reasons.  First, the Fed supplied way to 

much credit and way too little supervision.  It allowed banks to 

assume off-balance sheet liabilities, and contingent obligations 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 3. 

 

 

 

with no disclosure and with no capital requirements.  Fannie 

Mae, Freddie Mac led a headlong push to extend home ownership 

to Americans who were clearly unqualified financially to own 

their own homes.   The SEC allowed the investment firms to triple 

their leverage, and this was only about five years ago.  And the 

regulators put the force of law behind rating agency judgments so 

that their mistakes were not just private-sector actors making 

mistakes, but had huge systematic consequences.    

 

And finally, nobody stepped up to provide the most elementary 

safeguards for credit default swaps.  And that is the mechanism 

by which so many financial institutions are tied to each other, 

and it’s the mechanism that has created so much of a domino 

effect in our financial system.   So, there is a lot of blame to go 

around.  And to help sort out who deserves more blame, we have 

an outstanding panel tonight, and I think we’re in for a very, very 

exciting and elucidating evening.  Thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN 

I would just like to invite one more round of applause for our 

chairman who makes this possible, Robert Rosenkranz.  

[APPLAUSE]  Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to another 

Intelligence Squared US debate, I’m John Donvan, your host, and 

I will also be moderating as the debaters you see sharing the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 4. 

 

 

 

stage here with me at the Casparyy Auditorium at the Rockefeller 

University in New York City.   Two tables, three against three, will 

be debating this motion, “Blame Washington More Than Wall 

Street for the Financial Crisis.”  Now, this debate is not a panel 

discussion or a seminar, it is a contest, a contest of ideas and 

logic and wit, and perhaps charisma and humor.   But most of all 

persuasion, because by the time this debate concludes, you the 

audience will have voted twice, both before the debate, and again 

afterward, your vote is to side with or against our teams on the 

stage and their position.   At the end of the debate the team that 

has changed most minds over the course of the debate, will be 

declared the winner.  At this point then let’s do our first vote, you 

go to the keypads by your side, and I’ll give you about 30 seconds 

to register your position.   The motion is, “Blame Washington 

More Than Wall Street for the Financial Crisis.”  Press number 1 

if you agree with the motion, number 2 if you disagree, number 3 

if you are undecided.   

[PAUSE—AUDIENCE SOUND]  

 

Does anyone need more time?  Everyone figured that out, okay.  

[PAUSE]  All right, thank you, we’re gonna lock in the votes and 

we’ll begin the debate.  [PAUSE]  Now you have already completed 

the first vote and I will have the results from that first vote 

shortly.   But now, Round 1, opening statements, uninterrupted, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 5. 

 

 

 

seven minutes, each debater from each side, speaking in 

alternate turns, beginning with the side for the motion, “Blame 

Washington More Than Wall Street for the Financial Crisis.”   Our 

first debater, Niall Ferguson of Harvard University, he is an 

economic historian which means he is an explainer.  And his 

most recent book, The Ascent of Money, begins in its early 

chapters explaining with such eloquence that a third-grader 

could understand it.   By the end of the book, Niall, you’ve taken 

on the mess that we’re in now.  And I don’t know if anyone really 

understands that.  Niall Ferguson.   

[APPLAUSE]   

NIALL FERGUSON 

Well thank you very much indeed, ladies and gentlemen, it’s a 

great pleasure to be here with you tonight, nothing would be 

easier, than to blame everything on the bankers.  Think of 

Richard Fuld…of Lehman Brothers.  In 2007 his compensation, 

for the year, was $72 million.  The year before his firm collapsed.  

Never to be seen again.  Or James Cayne of Bear Stearns who 

made $290 million, in the nine years before his firm vanished 

without trace.   Not only were the bankers greedy, we would 

agree.  They were also, in many cases, incompetent.  But I and 

my colleagues are not here to praise them, or to defend them.  We 

blame them for much of what has gone wrong.  It’s just that we 

blame the politicians…more.  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 6. 

 

 

 

 

We’ve already heard quoted tonight that wonderful saying of 

Chuck Prince, as long as the music is playing you have to get up 

and dance but you have to ask yourselves, ladies and gentlemen, 

who was playing the music.  [LAUGHTER]   You know, it’s so 

easy, to heap opprobrium on Wall Street right now.  It’s just too 

easy.  And if you noticed, that’s exactly what the politicians do.  I 

couldn’t help but notice, in President Obama’s inaugural 

address, an allusion to greed, and irresponsibility.  And only 

yesterday, he was denouncing, and I quote, “The recklessness 

and greed of the bonuses paid to executives at the insurance 

company AIG.”   It was just the same in the last Great 

Depression, I think of this as the Slight Depression.  

[LAUGHTER]  FDR in his inaugural address, heaped scorn on the 

rulers of the exchange and the unscrupulous money-changers.   

Ladies and gentlemen, you have to ask yourselves…why do the 

politicians always wax so indignant about finance at times like 

these?  Could it just possibly be that they’re trying to divert our 

attention away from Washington’s own responsibility for the 

debacle?  

 

What I want to do in the brief time I have available is to invite you 

to consider the roles played by four institutions, in bringing 

about this financial crisis, and I also want you to reflect on the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 7. 

 

 

 

location of those institutions.  [LAUGHTER]   The first is the 

Federal Reserve Board.  Its role has been to allow a housing 

bubble to inflate, and burst, between January of 2001 and June 

of 2003, the Fed cut its federal funds rate from 6.5 percent to 1 

percent.   Then over three years it very gradually, by quarter-

points, raised rates up to 5.25 percent.  In that time, ladies and 

gentlemen, house price inflation in this country, rose from 7 

percent, to 17 percent a year, and it stayed above 15 percent a 

year, right until January of 2006.   

 

This was the period when Ben Bernanke, chairman of the Fed, 

proclaimed the advent of a great moderation, in economic life, 

yes, that was the title of his lecture in 2004.  “Some moderation.”  

The location of the Federal Reserve Board, is the Eccles Building, 

Constitution Avenue, Washington D.C.   The second institution,  

that I’d like to draw your attention to is the Securities and 

Exchange Commission, which under Christopher Cox, allowed 

the leverage in the banking system to spiral out of all control, 

from some 12 to 1, to as we’ve already heard this evening 

somewhere in the region of 20 to 30 to 1, in the case of the big 

investment banks.   And that was a conscious decision by the 

SEC.  The location of the SEC, ladies and gentlemen, 100 F 

Street Northwest, Washington, D.C.  My third prime suspect is 

Congress, ladies and gentlemen.   Yes, Congress because it was 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 8. 

 

 

 

Congress that wholly failed to supervise Fannie Mae, and Freddie 

Mac.  Those two essential institutions, which underpin the 

United States mortgage market.   

 

On the eve of their destruction, Fannie and Freddie had core 

capital, as defined by their regulator, of $83 billion, and 

supported around $5.2 trillion of debt and guarantees.  In other 

words they were leveraged 65-to-1.  The location of the Congress, 

I’m sure you’re aware of this but I can’t help but point it out 

[LAUGHTER], is Capitol Hill, Washington D.C.  And that brings 

me to another nearby location—the location of the White House.  

[LAUGHTER]   You know the White House played an extremely 

important role in creating the sub-prime mortgage disaster.  “We 

want everybody in America to own their own home,” declared 

President George W. Bush, in October in 2002.  Everybody, in 

America.    

 

He challenged lenders to create 5.5 million new minority 

homeowners, by the end of the decade.  He signed the American 

Dream Down Payment Act, in 2003.  No Presidential pressure, no 

sub-prime debacle.  The address of the White House, ladies and 

gentlemen, as you know, 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest, 

Washington D.C.  Well, ladies and gentlemen, bankers are nearly 

always actuated by greed, so, I’m sad to say, are many ordinary 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 9. 

 

 

 

people too.  But it’s the role of government to strike a balance, 

between market forces, and stability.  And I move in conclusion, 

that we should blame Washington more than Wall Street, for this 

crisis.   Not least because in my view, Washington sold itself to 

Wall Street.  And I very much fear, is still in hock to it.  I beg to 

propose this motion.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Niall Ferguson, arguing for the motion.  Now to argue 

against the motion, I’d like to introduce Alex Berenson.  Alex 

Berenson is a reporter for the New York Times who has covered a 

wide range of stories and issues, he’s been to Iraq, he has been to 

New Orleans to report on the effects of Hurricane Katrina, but 

he—  

WOMAN IN AUDIENCE 

[INAUDIBLE]  

JOHN DONVAN  

[00:11:55:00] Sorry?   

WOMAN IN AUDIENCE 

Louder?  

INTERVIEWER 

Shall I start again, could you not hear anything?  Sorry?   

WOMAN IN AUDIENCE 

The speaker [INAUDIBLE].  The speaker [INAUDIBLE], we can’t 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 10. 

 

 

 

hear the speaker.   

ALEX BERENSON 

I haven’t said anything yet.   

[AUDIENCE VOICES]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Oh—  He wasn’t talking yet.  [LAUGHTER, AUDIENCE VOICES]  

But how did that happen?  My mouth was moving.  [LAUGHTER]  

Alex Berenson is a journalist for the New York Times who has 

covered the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina and Iraq, but he’s 

most known and most relevant in this debate for his investigative 

work on Wall Street and, Alex, you are a novelist as well, I should 

point out, I don’t know if you could make up the situation we’re 

in now.  [LAUGHTER]  But here’s Alex Berenson to argue against 

the motion, “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street for the 

Financial Crisis.” 

[APPLAUSE]   

ALEX BERENSON 

Thank you, I hope you can all hear me, —  [LAUGHTER]   I see a 

lot of green out there tonight, which is fitting on two levels.  It’s 

also St. Patrick’s Day, another festival of wretched excess that 

will lead to some hangovers tomorrow.  [LAUGHTER]   And I have 

to say I’m at a great disadvantage because, Niall Ferguson has 

that accent, he could read the phone book to you and it would 

sound a lot smarter than I do.  [LAUGHTER]  But before I get 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 11. 

 

 

 

going I want to quickly address something that Niall said— Niall 

was talking a lot about institutions that were involved with 

residential home finance.  And there’s no doubt that mortgages, 

residential mortgages are a huge part of this crisis.  But the two 

banks that have collapsed in the last year, the two Wall Street 

banks that have effectively collapsed in the last year, Lehman 

and Bear, really weren’t all that involved in the residential 

mortgage finance business, they—  Not to say they weren’t 

involved but they weren’t as involved as a lot of other people.  

And the reason I point that out is because, the issues here, are a 

lot larger than Fannie and Freddie or the home price bubble, as 

significant as that is.   

 

So let me, let me start by going back to the resolution which, the 

resolution doesn’t say, we need more regulation going forward, I 

don’t think anyone on this panel, anyone in this room would 

disagree with that.  And the resolution doesn’t say that bankers 

should all be put on a desert island and forced to make their own 

society.   You know, I guess that’s the Hamptons but—  

[LAUGHTER]  Sorry, Jim.   But—  [LAUGHTER]  But what the 

resolution says is, “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street for 

the Financial Crisis.”  And that is flat wrong.   And to understand 

why, like Niall, I wanna take you back to the Depression, and to 

the creation of the SEC.  Now, the Depression was the last time 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 12. 

 

 

 

that there was this kind of public anger at Wall Street and at big 

business in the United States, and understandably so.    

 

And when the Roosevelt administration created the SEC, one of 

the things that they considered doing, briefly, was having the 

SEC have the power to prevent companies from selling shares, 

not because they were committing fraud or misrepresenting their 

financial statements, but simply because the SEC’s economic 

experts would find, well, this company doesn’t have very good 

prospects.  This company has too much competition.  We’re not 

gonna let them sell shares.  And that idea didn’t go very far, it 

was very rapidly rejected, but it was considered.  But what—why 

I think this is so important and interesting is it shows that even 

during the Depression, even during a time when unemployment 

was 25 percent and there were breadlines and there was really a 

question about whether capitalism could work, and there—you 

know, there was an alternative model that seemed to be working 

in the Soviet Union—   Even then the United States went with a 

relatively permissive, regulatory regime.  And that’s always been 

our history.   

 

And to me, that makes sense, and if you think about your own 

life, if you think about your own business as you know, whether 

you’re a lawyer or a doctor or whether you work in retail, whether 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 13. 

 

 

 

you—a landlord, whatever it is that you may do, you probably 

have a better idea where the opportunities are, but also where 

the problems are, where you can take advantage of your 

customers, where you can cut corners, than any regulator could 

no matter closely they monitored you.  It’s your business, it’s 

your life.  And so the regulator needs to set the rules, but in the 

end—you succeed or fail on your own.  And think about the 

commercial airline industry in the United States, which is really a 

great success story in the most important way which is that it’s 

extremely safe.   You can count the number of jet crashes this 

decade on one hand, in the United States.  And, you know, we’re 

going towards zero.   

 

And I don’t think that’s because the FAA is a better regulator 

than the FDA or the SEC, or anyone else, I think it’s because 

there’s a commitment in the airline industry to safety.  Now 

whether they define that as a moral issue, we need to protect our 

passengers and our workers, or whether it’s a practical issue 

where they believe there might not be economic repercussions, 

people might not wanna fly if there were too many crashes, I 

don’t know.   But there’s no question that the airline industry in 

the United States is extremely safe.  And I think it’s not a result 

of the FAA, I think it’s a result of a commitment within the 

industry.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 14. 

 

 

 

 

Compare that to Wall Street, which appears to have been run by 

a bunch of greedy children, for the last 10 years.  And greed is a 

crucial word there, because although Niall sort of—you know, he 

mentioned the compensation and then skated past it.  

Compensation is a crucial, crucial part of understanding what 

went wrong on Wall Street in the last 10 years.  When you can 

make a million or 10 million or in some cases $100 million for a 

year’s work, you don’t have very much incentive to run your 

business for the long term.  If you can…if theoretically, you’re 

being paid in stock, and your compensation is gonna be 

restricted over a long time, you have more incentive.   But even 

so if the numbers are really, really large, it’s unlikely that you’re 

going to think long-term.  And so I think Jim now will talk to you 

about some of the specifics of what went wrong on Wall Street in 

the last 10 years.  But, at its core, the issue is relatively simple, 

there was a huge amount of leverage taken, there was inadequate 

capital to support the risks that the banks were taking.   

 

When you make loans, some of them are gonna go bad, and you 

need to have enough money in capital, in equity, to handle those 

losses, and the banks simply didn’t have that.  Now, did 

Washington create the conditions that allowed that to happen, 

sure.    Could we and should we have had a much more robust 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 15. 

 

 

 

regulatory system?  Absolutely.  Regulation is vital, regulation 

sets the playing field, it sets the rules.   But in the end, you have 

to put blame where blame is due.  And, blame is due on the 

firms.  It’s due on the owners, it’s due on the managers, it’s due 

on the executives, it’s due on the employees.   To some extent, 

although to a lesser extent it’s due on shareholders because the 

shareholders didn’t properly manage the boards of directors but 

that’s something Nell can talk about.  But in the end, blame 

accrues to Wall Street, not Washington, please keep that in mind, 

and vote against this resolution.  Thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Alex Berenson, speaking against the motion,  Now to 

speak for the motion, “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street 

for the Financial Crisis,” I’d like to introduce John Gordon Steele, 

a man who’s a little bit difficult to pin down, he is an adventurer, 

he has spent time in politics, he’s been a filmmaker, he has been 

an NPR commentator and still is, but it’s as an author of books 

focusing on critical periods in financial history that he comes to 

us today with expertise to argue for the motion, “Blame 

Washington More Than Wall Street for the Financial Crisis.”  

Ladies and gentlemen, John Gordon Steele.  [APPLAUSE]  I’m 

sorry…  I’m gonna correct that, ladies and gentlemen, John 

Steele Gordon.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 16. 

 

 

 

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN STEELE GORDON 

The British always wanna file me under Steele-Gordon, with a 

hyphen.  [LAUGHTER]  I only use my middle name because John 

Gordon is about as blah a name as you can find.  I’m here to 

argue that Washington is more at fault than Wall Street, although 

as everybody has admitted, Wall Street has plenty of blame to 

take here.   But…Wall Street is not unitary.  Wall Street is 

nothing but a metonym for the American financial market, and it 

operates around the globe and…nowadays, deep down into the 

socioeconomic spectrum.   Now some of the people who are 

encompassed by the term “Wall Street” have fiduciary obligations 

to their stockholders or to their depositors.  But the majority of, 

of Wall Streeters do not.  They are operating entirely for 

themselves in their self-interest.   

 

Washington on the other hand, has nothing but fiduciaries, I 

mean that’s why governments are instituted among men, no 

other reason.  Now, Wall Street because it is entirely inhabited by 

people who are pursuing their self-interest, it’s notorious that 

there are only two emotions to be found on Wall Street, fear and 

greed.  [LAUGHTER]   Right now I think it’s perhaps time to put 

in a good word for greed.  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]  As a result, 

we have had panics on Wall Street roughly every 20 years. Now 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 17. 

 

 

 

the Constitution came into effect in April of 1789, we had the first 

crash on Wall Street in April of 1792.  Then we had another one 

1819, 1837, 1857, 1873, 1893, 1907, 1929, 1987, and now 

2008.  It seems to be just part of the beast, I mean could any of 

these panics have been prevented by Wall Street?  I doubt it.  

Being individuals, and Wall Street is nothing but a collection of 

individuals, not an institution, it is inherently susceptible to the 

madness of crowds.   

 

So, blaming Wall Street is like blaming the atmosphere for 

thunderstorms, it’s the nature of the beast, it’s going to happen.  

Washington on the other hand is supposed to be the guys with 

the striped shirts and the whistles on the playing field.  They 

make up the rules, and then they enforce them.  And then they 

sometimes change the rules in order to accommodate some of 

their friends.  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]  Also Alan Greenspan 

famously said, that it is—part of the Federal Reserve’s job is to 

take away the punchbowl when the party really gets going.  In 

other words it’s Washington’s job to prevent the crowd from going 

mad.  [PAUSE]  They’ve just done an incredibly lousy job of 

regulating Wall Street or preventing the madness of crowds.  I 

mean for one thing the regulatory apparatus is a total shambles.   

 

I mean we have the Federal Reserve, we have the Controller of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 18. 

 

 

 

the Currency, we have the SEC, we have the Office of Thrift 

Supervision.  We have the FDIC.  We have the banking regulatory 

authorities of the 50 states.  All of them bureaucracies, all of 

them devoted as all bureaucrats are to protecting turf, far and 

head of, of actually regulating anything.   Now, also, politicians 

are subject to human nature, the same as Wall Streets [sic] are.  

If Wall Streeters are in the business of making money, politicians 

are in the reelection business.  That means that they’re gonna be 

short term-oriented, they’re gonna—what they want is the good 

headline tomorrow morning, and if that produces dreadful policy 

two or three or five years out, that’s after the election, we’ll worry 

about it then.  [PAUSE]   

 

Everybody knows that publicly-traded corporations have to 

submit annual reports, that these reports have to be according to 

standardized accounting rules, and that they have to be certified 

as being honest and complete by independent accountants.  This 

is a great idea.  It’s now so obvious that nobody even thinks 

about it anymore, but it was invented by Wall Street.  Because 

the great Wall Street banks in the late 19th century, they wanted 

to know what the corporations were really up to, and so did the 

members of the New York Stock Exchange.   So the corporation 

screamed bloody murder at first, but the Wall Street banks said 

sorry, if you want us to underwrite your securities, you’re gonna 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 19. 

 

 

 

have to do this, and the New York Stock Exchange says if you 

want your securities listed with us, you’re gonna have to do it, so 

they finally did it.   There’s still one great big player in the 

financial world in the United States, that is not subject to these 

commonsense rules.  It’s called the government.   

 

For instance, you remember those budget surpluses in the later 

years of the Clinton administration between 1998 and 2001?  

They amounted to $558 billion.  So the national debt went down 

by $558 billion, right?  Uh, no, it went up by $400 billion.   The 

reason is that Social Security was put on budget.  And that 

means that the revenues that flow into Social Security over and 

above what is paid out to recipients of Social Security becomes 

part of the government revenue, it’s called an intra-governmental 

transfer.  Of course the money that’s taken out of the Social 

Security trust fund is replaced with newly minted federal bonds.  

Which is why the debt went up.   Now, if a private company or 

publicly-traded company, tried to take employee contributions to 

the company pension fund, and call it revenue in order to perk 

up the bottom line, the managers of that corporation would all 

this very minute be playing volleyball in Club Fed.  [LAUGHTER]   

Or, consider Fannie and Freddie.  It was a great—Fannie was a 

great idea, it sounded, in 1938--and it really, it liquefied the 

mortgage market, it helped, along with the GI Bill tremendously, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 20. 

 

 

 

to increase home ownership, and I’m gonna have to quit here I’m 

afraid.    

JOHN DONVAN  

I have to interrupt you.  Thank you very much.  [APPLAUSE]  But 

for the introduction I’d like to—I’d like to give you the shot at 

being applauded twice because, for the radio broadcast since I 

made the error on your name I’d like to reintroduce you and have 

everybody applaud for you again, and you can enjoy that.  Ladies 

and gentlemen, let’s welcome John Steele Gordon.  [APPLAUSE]   

[00:28:18:15]  I’m really sorry for that, let’s look at where we are.  

We are halfway through our opening remarks, I’m your 

moderator, John Donvan, we are hearing from two teams of three 

debaters each, arguing this motion, “Blame Washington More 

Than Wall Street for the Financial Crisis.”    

 

We are now going to hear from the next debater against the 

motion.  Jim Chanos is the founder and managing partner of 

Kynikos Associates.  He has had a successful period let us say 

because, he is a man who bets against the market.   Recently a 

very successful period, I don’t know, Jim, in this situation, are 

congratulations in order—  [LAUGHTER]  But, I welcome you to 

our debate, ladies and gentlemen, Jim Chanos.   

[APPLAUSE]   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 21. 

 

 

 

JIM CHANOS 

Thank you, John, and thank you to Robert and to Intelligence 

Squared for putting on this great series and heightening the 

public debate on these important issues.  I think you’re doing 

great, great work, thank you.  Now, we’ve heard from two-thirds 

of the “for” team’s members, and from my august teammate, Mr. 

Berenson.   And, we all seem to be missing sight of the 

resolution.  Again, no one seems to disagree that more regulation 

is needed.  No one seems to disagree, that crimes, malfeasance, 

and incompetence, were at work.  The question is who’s more to 

blame.  And I hope to be able to make my point, that in fact 

that’s gonna be pretty easy to point out.   

 

Before I got here I was searching the web for instances of Irish 

wit when it comes to financial markets and money.  [LAUGHTER]  

Now my mother was Mary Catherine Sullivan, and as much as I— 

I tried hard to find examples of that wit, I came a cropper.   So I 

had to turn to another great philosopher, in all matters economic.  

Tony Soprano.  Who went imploring his gang to work harder, 

‘cause not enough money was coming in to keep everybody 

happy, said “Look, we don’t got one of them Enron things here.”  

[LAUGHTER]    

 

This is important.  [LAUGHTER]  Because, I would like to go on to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 22. 

 

 

 

tell you that agency risk as it exists in corporate America is 

legion.  It is endemic, and it is pervasive.  In 1998 Business Week 

put out a survey, after, canvassing 500 of the S&P 500 Chief 

Financial Officers anonymously.   And they were asked in the 

celebrated question, “How many of you have ever been asked by 

your superior to materially falsify financial results.”  And the 

answer was stunning.  45 percent said they were asked to do so 

but didn’t, 12 percent said they were asked to do, and did, and 

33 percent said they were never asked.   So at the time, 10 years 

ago, two thirds of our nation’s largest CFO’s had basically been 

asked to cook the books.  And luckily, only a minority did so.  

And lest you think this was an outlier, the same survey roughly, 

was repeated by CFO magazine six months later, and had very, 

very similar results.   

 

It’s the main reason I have a business that I feel will continue to 

prosper no matter what the markets do.  Because quite frankly 

out there, there’s a lotta people in the public markets that wanna 

take your money.  And that, ladies and gentleman, is a point I 

think that we are going to carry tonight.  [PAUSE]   How did we 

get, in the last five years, when things seemed to escalate so 

much, so much worse on the fraud side, from Enron, Tyco and 

rogue analysts, to the world of Bear Sterns, Lehman Brothers, 

AIG, Bernie Madoff, and Stanford Financial.  Well…I think the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 23. 

 

 

 

reason we have, is that those in charge, yes, they may have fallen 

asleep.  Yes, they may have done dereliction of duty.  But we saw 

a level of compensation, and a new structure of structured 

finance that allowed, as Alex pointed out, undreamed-of amounts 

of leverage, and skewed incentives for compensation.  It was 

heads I win, tails, my shareholders lose.   

 

Every trading desk had a mantra of making their numbers in one 

way, shape, form or another, and did so quite easily in all kinds 

of markets in the last five to 10 years, up, down, whatever.  It 

was not just Madoff who produced stunning consistent and 

profitable results.   If you look at the profits as Bob Rosenkranz 

alluded to in his opening statement, of our largest banks and 

brokers, no matter what the markets did, many of these firms 

returned 20 to 30 percent on equity, quarter in, quarter out, with 

very little variability of operations.  How did that happen.  Well, 

they were gaming the system.   Remember Sarbanes-Oxley?  I do, 

I got all kinds of phone calls from the press after Sarbanes-Oxley 

saying well you don’t have a job anymore.  Short selling will never 

be profitable.  Yes, corporate malfeasance will be a thing of the 

past.  Because CEO’s and CFO’s now have to sign the financial 

statements.  And if something goes wrong, they could go to jail.   

 

And when I pointed out to those same journalists that falsifying 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 24. 

 

 

 

financial statements has always been a crime, and this just 

[LAUGHTER] simply codified it a little tighter.  Well, this is post-

Enron,  people are going to be vigilant, and accountants and 

lawyers will not let this happen.   Ladies and gentlemen, I will 

pose to you that there has not been one major financial fraud in 

the past 25 years, uncovered by the government, outside 

auditors, or outside counsel.  It’s always been journalists, 

whistle-blowers, or short sellers, or some combination thereof.   

Daresay, that if Bernie Madoff had been public, the shorts 

would’ve found him out a long time ago.  [PAUSE]  Now, post-

Sarbanes-Oxley, post-Enron, we had to move to tougher 

accounting standards.   We saw FAZ 46 get brought in, and I’m 

not gonna bog you down in arcane but it basically said, keeping 

things off the balance sheet is no longer kosher.  Part of the 

problem with Enron as you recall were the funds that were 

offshore that an Enron CFO was general partner of while he was 

still undertaking his duties as Enron CFO.   

 

Well, guess who lobbied for a big exemption, of those rules.  The 

banks and brokers, who got FIN 46-R enacted which was, 

financial institutions were exempt, from the consolidation of 

offshore entities and unconsolidated entities, hiding large 

amounts of assets and liabilities.  Imagine that.  And while we’re 

at it let’s talk about Professor Ferguson’s locus of problems.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 25. 

 

 

 

Well the Fed, yeah, the Fed’s located in Washington, there’s no 

doubt about that.  But the part of the Fed that is instructed to be 

the market cop, is the New York Fed.  Now the New York Fed for 

the past few years was run by the current Treasury secretary.   

But do you know who sits on the board of the New York Fed and 

do you know who it answers to.  Bet very few of you do.  The 

largest commercial banks in the United States.    

JOHN DONVAN  

Jim Chanos, I have to cut you off, your time is up.  Thank you 

very much, ladies and gentlemen, Jim Chanos.  [APPLAUSE]  

Now to argue for the motion, “Blame Washington More Than Wall 

Street for the Financial Crisis,” I’d like to introduce Nouriel 

Roubini…known, I think we all know, as Dr. Doom.  [LAUGHTER]   

Having predicted much of what has happened a few years back, 

having a name like that only really works out if you turn out to 

be correct.  [LAUGHTER]  So far so good, Dr. Doom, ladies and 

gentlemen, Nouriel Roubini.   

[APPLAUSE]   

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.  I say the beginning [sic] I 

support the proposition, I blame more Washington, than Wall 

Street for this financial crisis, but I should say the beginning, 

that I do agree that Wall Streeters, bankers, traders, investors, 

are greedy.   Sometimes they are stupid, they are arrogant, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 26. 

 

 

 

they’re incompetent.  They take too much risk, they take too 

much leverage, they are over compensated, all that’s true.  But 

we’ve had the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, 

we have to ask ourselves, are bankers and investors more greedy 

and more immoral than they were 20 years ago.   20 years ago, 

Gordon Gekko in Wall Street said that greed is good.  I don’t think 

that has changed, you know, we know there is always greed, 

actually greed in some sense is good, is one of the drivers of 

capitalism.   But we know that greed has to be controlled by 

three things.  By fear of losses, by the fact they should not expect 

to be bailed out, and by a system of prudential regulation and 

supervision of the financial system because financial markets 

without ruling institutions are like the law of the jungle.   

 

And that’s to me the failure, I expect Wall Street to be greedy but 

I expect good policy-making, trying to control the behavior, and 

that did not happen.  In many dimensions.  The Fed and 

Greenspan, after the last tech bubble went bust, cut interest 

rates almost to zero, and created the asset bubble, kept interest 

rates too low for too long.   Was most at that time, people talked 

about the Greenspan put [sic] in financial markets, it was the 

expectation whenever trouble occurs, Greenspan’s gonna ease 

things and get you out of your losses and problems.   It happened 

after the 1987 stock market crash and the S&L crisis easing, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 27. 

 

 

 

then in the ‘90s with the tech bubble, Greenspan warned about 

irrational exuberance and did nothing about it.  And after the 

tech bubble went bust, he cut interest rates from 6.5 down to 1 

percent, and he created the latest bubble.   

 

So, he has been a creator of serial bubbles one after the other 

and when people expect to be bailed out then they behave 

accordingly, that’s the Greenspan truth.  We created a system 

which people expect, that the gains are going to be privatized, 

and the losses are going to be socialized; this is a welfare state for 

the rich, for the well-connected and for Wall Street.   That’s what 

happened, that’s public policy.  The action of the Fed regarding 

the asset bubble, was, you don’t do anything on the way up, that 

was the official rule of Greenspan, Don Kohn, and Ben Bernanke, 

and when the asset bubble collapses, to avoid the collateral 

damage to the real economy, you ease aggressively.   Again, that’s 

a buyer’s behavior that creates more and more bubbles.  We’re 

running out of bubbles actually to create, with the real estate 

bubble, the tech bubble, the hedge fund bubble, the private 

equity bubble, you know, even the commodity bubble, the art 

bubble, we’re running out of bubbles to create but we’re easing 

again down to zero so, what’s gonna happen this time around.   

 

As was pointed out, the job of the Fed is to take away the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 28. 

 

 

 

punchbowl when the party gets going but unfortunately not only 

the Fed did not take away the punchbowl, it added vodka, 

whiskey, gin, and every toxic stuff to it.  [LAUGHTER]  And it 

made the bubble even bigger.   Take the role of the Fed and the 

regulators, with sub-prime mortgages…Greenspan was the 

biggest cheerleader of this kind of financial innovation.  Zero 

down payment, no verification of income, assets and jobs, they 

called them ninja loans or liar loans.   Interest-only mortgages, 

negative amortization, teaser rates, all this toxic stuff or sub-

prime, near-prime, prime.  The Fed and Greenspan actively said 

was the best thing that have happened to mortgages.  Free 

market, they could control it, they had the law, the power to do it, 

they didn’t do it.   

 

Think about our public policy towards housing and mortgages.  

The Community Reinvestment Act, creation of Fannie and 

Freddie-subsidized housing.  The 20 ways in which we have 

subsidized, through tax policy, interested community of 

mortgages.   The worst, and the most unproductive form of 

investment, investment in housing.  Big McMansion can give you 

utility but doesn’t increase the stock of capital in the real way of 

productivity of capital and labor, like, physical capital does.  We 

have subsidized housing in 20 different ways.  That has led to the 

bubble as well.   There was an ideology for the last decade in 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 29. 

 

 

 

Washington, that was critical to this financial crisis.  Was an 

ideology of laissez-faire, Wild West unregulated capitalists.   The 

base of this ideology was the idea that banks and financial 

institutions will self-regulate.   And as we know, self-regulation 

means no regulation.  It was the ideology of relying on market 

discipline, and we know when there is irrational exuberance, 

there is zero market discipline.   

 

There was an ideology, and policies of relying on an internal risk-

management model and as was pointed out, Chuck Prince said, 

when the music is playing you gotta stand up and dance, nobody 

listens in good times to the risk managers, they’re the party 

poopers, only the risk takers have the advantage in the banks, 

and therefore, relying on internal risk management doesn’t work.  

Was relying on rating agencies that had massive conflicts of 

interest because of being paid by those they are supposed to be 

rating.   And this rating agency had a quasi-governmental role.  

They had monopoly or oligopoly power, and power to decide 

whose assets you can buy or not buy, that was policy that led 

them to have that power, and those kind of distortions.   

 

So every element of our regulatory system, has failed, you know, 

this Basel accord that relied on this principle, has failed even 

before it was implemented.  Relying on principle rather than 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 30. 

 

 

 

rules, relying on light touch, rather than tough rules, a light 

touch means no touch at all.  The ideology of Greenspan was, 

every financial innovation is great, markets self-regulate.  

Shareholders are gonna be able to control the behavior of 

bankers and so on.  This was the belief in deregulation.  

Elements of it, actions were taken.  The repeal of Glass-Steagall 

that separated investment banking from commercial banking.   

Now we let them essentially, use deposit insurance and deposits 

to do 30 times leverage prop trading, that’s what was allowed.  

Essentially deregulation of credit derivatives and derivatives, over 

the counter with systemic risk.   

 

Things of that sort were going on.  The SEC deciding the level 

ratios, 30 to 1 was okay.  Those were the policy that led then to 

those excesses.  There is greed, it is up to public policy to make 

sure that greed is controlled because otherwise if you don’t have 

rules, institutions, and balance and prudential regulation 

supervision, is the law of the jungle, and unfortunately the last 

element of it was regulatory capture.  It was an ideology in which, 

the government [UNCLEAR] power taken over and controlled by 

lobbies where those were pushing for this kind of deregulation.  

So it was a massive failure of public policy, thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 31. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Nouriel Roubini.  Finally to speak against the motion, 

Nell Minow who is an attorney who has held positions in various 

government agencies but she’s best known and again most 

relevant in this debate, for having run a firm which held 

corporate CEO’s to strict accountability, she was described by 

Fortune magazine as “the CEO killer.”  And I know we have some 

CEO’s in the room, Nell, so this is not literal, is it.  Ladies and 

gentlemen, Nell Minow.    

NELL MINOW 

Only when they deserve it.  [APPLAUSE]  You’ve got to vote for 

our side.  [LAUGHTER]  I have to tell you, you know, there’s 

plenty of blame to go around, we all agree, there’s plenty of blame 

to go around.  You know, there’s Washington, there’s Wall Street, 

but all of us know who really is to blame here, it’s gotta be Jim 

Cramer.  [LAUGHTER]  Listen, I’m willing to blame everybody, I’m 

even willing to blame that Bachelor guy, I— everybody, everybody 

deserves—  it takes a village to create this problem.  Or 

[UNCLEAR] put it another way I’m gonna quote Pogo, who said, 

“We have met the enemy and he is us,” every one of us bears 

some responsibility for what went on here but I’m gonna tell you 

today, why it’s Wall Street that is primarily responsible.   

 

First of all, it’s a bit of a false distinction, between Wall Street and 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 32. 

 

 

 

Washington.  And one of the things I’m going to talk about today 

is how inextricably they are linked.  We talk about Fannie and 

Freddie.  Those were public corporations, after all.  They were a 

little bit the better, the worst of both worlds, a little bit of a duck 

billed platypus because they had a little government edge there.  

But those were public corporations with Boards of Directors and 

they behaved like public corporations.  They behaved badly.  And 

that is what is wrong with Wall Street.  So you may noticed 

already, even in this few minutes that I’ve been up here, I’m 

different.  I’m not like anybody else on this panel and that is why, 

and the primary difference, as I’m sure you’ve noticed, is I’m the 

only one on the panel who is from Washington.  [LAUGHTER]   

 

I have to say, none of these people know anything about 

Washington except some addresses.  That’s all we know.  I see 

he’s got a GPS, is all he’s got.  [LAUGHTER]  [APPLAUSE]  And 

you know, and the other thing is, I’m not an economist.  I am a 

capitalist.  I, uniquely on this panel, I have created businesses.  I 

have created businesses, had them grow and sold them.   I have 

worried about making a payroll.  So I know something.  I’m not 

like an economist who, it works in theory, it doesn’t work in 

practice.  So I know what it is to be a capitalist.  And I know what 

it is to be a bureaucrat.  I worked in the government.   In the 

Reagan administration I was at OMB.  And let me tell you, one of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 33. 

 

 

 

the big shocks in my life was all these people who espouse and 

rhapsodize about the free market kept trooping over to me to get 

me to give them limits on liability and erect barriers to entry.   

 

Everybody is all about the free market except when it benefits 

them not to be.  So I’m going to tell you the three things that Wall 

Street did that are unforgivable and that really weigh the balance 

in favor of their responsibility.  What is the one thing we want 

from Wall Street?  We want just one thing.  We want them to be 

able to do math, right?  [LAUGHTER]  The math was wrong.  

Their math was bad.  They put too much reliance on something 

called the Gaussian copula formula.  Yes, the Gaussian copula 

formula is at the heart of what created the derivative securities, 

the credit default swaps.  They all relied on it.  They all got on 

one leaky little boat.  They didn’t take out their slide rules.  They 

didn’t do the math.  So they relied on bad statistics.  They left out 

one big variable.  Yes, they heard music, but what dance were 

they doing?  They heard music for the minuet.  They were doing 

the boogie, okay?  And what is the address of all of those forms?  

I believe it’s on Wall Street.    

 

Second thing, bad incentives.  They were getting paid based on 

the quantity of transactions, not the quality of transactions.  

Now, it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out that’s going to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 34. 

 

 

 

have a very bad result.  Look at what we’ve seen about the pay 

just in the last couple of days.  Look at The New York Post with its 

headline today:  AIG Is a P-I-G.  [LAUGHTER]  These people were 

getting paid regardless of what happened.  You heard about 

Anthony Mozilo?  Six hundred million dollars as he took the 

stock down seventy-eight per cent and took the economy down 

with it.  Fuld didn’t have to give any of it back.  I testified with 

Fuld before Congress in Washington when they called him in to 

account.  And he said, up until last year the performance was 

pretty good.  So he should be allowed to keep all that money.  

Only thirteen percent of companies on Wall Street have claw 

backs, meaning they have to give back the money when the 

numbers that were reported, that they got their bonuses on, turn 

out to be wrong.   

 

That is on Wall Street.  What are they doing now?  Watch them 

carefully.  They are repricing their options.  That is disgusting.  

And that is Wall Street.  Okay, next.  Terrible oversight as 

shareholders.  Yes, the shareholders should have done more.  

Guess who the big shareholders are?  Yeah, they’re on Wall 

Street.  Who was it that was voting in favor of these insane pay 

packages?  Well, look at the firms on Wall Street.  They’re the big 

shareholders.  They’re managing all that money.  They are 

enablers for the addiction of bad pay packages on Wall Street.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 35. 

 

 

 

And yeah, Washington behaved badly.  Washington behaved very 

badly.  Do you think the fact that from 1998 to 2008 over six 

hundred million dollars was spent on lobbying to get rid of 

regulations, like Glass-Steagall, to get rid of capital requirements 

on banks – do you think maybe that might have had an effect on 

it?   

 

Yeah, Washington is nice to its friends.  Who is responsible for 

that?  Who are its friends?  I would like Wall Street to make the 

same disclaimer that is required of mutual funds.  Past 

performance is no guarantee of future performance.  And who is 

it that requires them to say that?  That is Washington.  Wall 

Street has expected us to bet on them for a long time.  They have 

not lived up to our trust in them and they are more responsible 

than Washington for this mess.  Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN 

Thank you, Nell.  You know, and that concludes round one, 

opening remarks of this debate.  We had you vote when you came 

in, vote on whether you side with the motion, against the motion 

or are undecided.  And we have the first results from that first 

vote.  Restating the motion:  Blame Washington More Than Wall 

Street for the Financial Crisis, forty-two percent of you vote for 

this motion, thirty percent vote against and twenty-eight percent 

remain undecided.   We’ll poll you again at the end of the evening 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 36. 

 

 

 

and the team that moves most votes, the team that changes most 

minds will be declared our winner.  So we’re now going to move 

on to round two and in round two the debaters talk to each other 

directly and they also take questions from us.  So on to round 

two.  And I just want to ask Niall Ferguson, since your side is 

arguing that Wall Street should be blamed for the economic crisis 

and we heard your ca...I’m sorry, Washington should be blamed 

for the economic crisis.   And we heard your teammates say that 

Washington did not do its job well.  My question really is, if 

Washington had performed its job well, would we have an 

economic crisis?   

NIALL FERGUSON 

Well, I think one way of answering that question is to ask 

whether every country in the world is having a financial crisis 

comparable to the one that’s being experienced in the United 

States.  Now, most countries in the world are experiencing an 

economic crisis, largely as a consequence of what is happening 

here.  But they’re not all experiencing a financial crisis.  You 

don’t have to travel terribly far, actually, to get to a country where 

banks are and have been adequately regulated.  That country is 

called Canada.  [AUDIENCE REACTION]   So if you simply look at 

what’s happened there it becomes obvious that something was 

egregiously wrong with the regulatory environment in the United 

States.  And that is our central point.  It’s not difficult to see that 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 37. 

 

 

 

there was a grotesque failure on the part of regulators and 

politicians here.  You only have to look north of the border.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Nell Minow, you’re on the opposite side of the, of the argument 

but I see you nodding.    

NELL MINOW   

Well... 

NIALL FERGUSON 

That’s always a good sign.  [LAUGHTER]    

NELL MINOW   

You know, the fact is that the banks are supposed to be able to 

respond to whatever is provided for them in some kind of a 

rational way.  And they didn’t do.  As I said, they all relied too 

heavily on the same set of numbers.  But I’m not sure that I 

think that more regulation is the answer.  Is that what you’re 

arguing for?    

NIALL FERGUSON  

On the contrary.  I’ve never said I’m in favor of more regulation, 

simply better regulation.    

NELL MINOW   

Well, in what way is it better?   

NIALL FERGUSON 

 [OVERLAP]  Can I conclude my point?  If you think back to the 

highly regulated financial markets of the 1970s, it’s not as if that 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 38. 

 

 

 

was a period without financial crisis.  I’m old enough to 

remember stagflation and the secondary banking crisis in the 

U.K. and the problems of that period were in many ways as 

serious.  Certainly the recession of the early 1970s was as 

serious as anything we’ve experienced so far, though I don’t rule 

out that this is going to get worse.  So, no, I’m not in favor of 

more regulation.  The heavy regulations that were imposed 

during and after the Great Depression didn’t actually prove to be 

that benign.  The trouble is that the deregulation, much of which 

was justifiable, was taken to excess.  This, I think, is the point 

that John Steele Gordon, Nouriel Roubini and I want to stress.  

And it’s not difficult, if one compares different regulatory 

frameworks around the world, to see why the U.S. was so bad.   

NELL MINOW   

But don’t you think the fact, the point that I made about six 

hundred million dollars being poured into Washington, they don’t 

have that system in Canada, either, for lobbying and for political 

campaign fundraising.   

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

[OVERLAP]  But you understate the case.    

JOHN DONVAN  

[OVERLAP]  Nouriel Roubini, let’s let Nouriel Roubini come in and 

respond.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 39. 

 

 

 

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

I think there is a strong correlation that goes to history between 

degree of proper regulation and financial crisis.  You know, after 

the Great Depression we imposed a system of strong regulations 

of the financial system, capital controls and for a few decades 

there were not that many financial crises and banking crises.  It’s 

not just the U.S.  If you look around, for the last twenty years, 

you have had financial crises and banking crises and so on in a 

number of countries.  And what has been changing over the last 

twenty years, starting with Ronald Reagan and then Margaret 

Thatcher, the ideology became of deregulation at any cost, first in 

advanced economies and then in emerging markets.   

 

Now, some deregulation was good.  Nobody is in favor of excess.  

Even probably we swang the balance too much in the direction of 

too much regulation after the Great Depression and that led to 

not enough financial innovation.  But deregulation without a 

proper institution and so on has been known to lead to financial 

crises, like in East Asia, like in Mexico, like in Argentina and so 

on.  And therefore, there is a strong correlation between the 

quality of the regulatory and supervisory regime and whether 

financial crisis occurs.  There’s a trade off between the two, but 

that’s what’s really the fact that now in spite of the great 

moderation, low inflation and growth, these financial crises are 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 40. 

 

 

 

occurring now more frequently.  These should occur once every 

thousand years.  Now occur every other year – more frequently, 

more virulent and more costly in every way.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Alex Berenson, from the other side.   

ALEX BERENSON 

Certainly there has been a huge amount of deregulation in the 

last twenty years.  There’s also been major changes in the 

structure of Wall Street.  Firms, you know, Wall Street was 

essentially a set of partnerships, largely, until the Seventies and 

by the Nineties, I think, Goldman was the last big firm to give up 

the partnership model.  So, again, it’s not your capital at risk 

anymore.  It’s your shareholders’ capital at risk.  You don’t own 

your firm anymore, you own a portion of it.  I don’t think it’s an 

accident that there are some small partnerships out there that 

have essentially thri --  Well, thrive may be too strong a word.  

But they have survived this crisis.   

 

The other very, very important change, really the most important 

change, is the egregious increase in compensation.  It’s one thing 

if you’re making five hundred thousand dollars a year.  Let’s say 

you’re making some multiple of an average American’s salary, 

where if you do that for ten years, you’re, you know, you’re very 

well off.  It’s another thing if one good year makes your life and 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 41. 

 

 

 

makes your children’s lives.  It really skews your incentives.   

JOHN DONVAN 

John Steele Gordon.   

JOHN STEELE GORDON 

I just want to point out that Nell has said that Wall Street spent 

six hundred million dollars lobbying Washington for regulations 

that Wall Street liked.  I’m sure that’s perfectly true.   On the 

other hand, Washington took the money [AUDIENCE RESPONSE] 

[APPLAUSE]  and produced the regulation.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Nell?    

NELL MINOW   

You know what?  Washington has its own market system.  And,  

[LAUGHTER]  people have got to get re-elected.  That’s what 

accountability is.  Yeah, they took the money.  But, you know, 

you’re blaming the victim there.  [LAUGHTER]  [SMATTERING OF 

APPLAUSE, SOME JEERS]   

JOHN DONVAN 

Nell, do you want to respond to the audience response?    

NELL MINOW   

Yeah, sure.  If, look, [LAUGHTER]  if --   

MAN  

[OVERLAP]  The victims are the people who pay taxes here.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 42. 

 

 

 

NELL MINOW   

[OVERLAP]  If you want to, if you want to make this about 

campaign finance reform, I’d be happy to turn this into that 

debate and I’d be happy to come back and have that debate.  I’m 

totally in favor of that.  But the United States is the only country 

in the world that has this level of corruption coming into politics 

from money because this is the only country in the world that 

doesn’t free television time and forces politicians to buy the time.  

So you want to take money out of politics, I think that would be a 

great thing.  I think it would be hugely beneficial in Washington, 

believe me.  But you cannot blame, you cannot blame 

Washington  [SMATTERING OF APPLAUSE]  for the fact that all 

this money comes in from Wall Street.  [APPLAUSE]   .    

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

You know, Washington might be corrupt but you have to think 

about the international dimension of this phenomenon.  There 

are many countries with totally different laws about lobbying and 

so on and there have been about fifty banking crises in the last 

twenty years and have occurred in very different political regimes.  

And if there is something in common among all of them, it’s that 

in most of these cases you had a controlled financial system and 

then deregulation occurred too fast and in ways that did not 

provide prudent regulations provision of the financial system.  As 

I said, you know, capitalism is based on greed.  Greed is just 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 43. 

 

 

 

about incentive, about maximizing returns.  We’re all greedy, you 

know.  First of all, you said you are the only one from 

Washington.  I spent two years at the White House in Treasury 

and also ran a successful business.  So I know about policy.  I 

also know about business.  I tell you, in my business I’m greedy 

and I react to incentives but I want public policy  [AUDIENCE 

REACTION]  to be setting rules and regulations so that I don’t 

misbehave and I don’t cheat and I don’t lie –  

JOHN DONVAN 

[OVERLAP]  Please, let me bring,  –  

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

...and I don’t take excessive risks with taxpayers’ money 

because— 

JOHN DONVAN  

Niall, Niall Ferguson.  Your teammate, Niall.   

NIALL FERGUSON 

Nell, I’m still struggling to understand how the recipients of 

bribes are victims.  [LAUGHTER]  I’m sorry.  [APPLAUSE]    

NELL MINOW   

[OVERLAP, UNCLEAR]    

NIALL FERGUSON  

[OVERLAP]  I have to tell you, you’re,  I’m afraid your moral GPS 

just broke down on you there.  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]  Let me 

just say, let me just say that this is abso --    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 44. 

 

 

 

NELL MINOW   

 [OVERLAP]  [UNCLEAR]  It is not a [UNCLEAR]  ...and in fact, if 

you look at the lobbying statistics you’ll see that half of the 

people that took the money voted against them anyway, which is 

part of politics, too.  But the point is, as you well know, people 

ran... 

NIALL FERGUSON 

[OVERLAP]  Well, hang on.    

NELL MINOW   

[OVERLAP]  People ran for office and were elected on policies of 

deregulation.  And –  

NIALL FERGUSON 

[OVERLAP]  Hang on one moment.   

NELL MINOW 

Okay.    

NIALL FERGUSON  

You’ve hit the nail on the head here.  AIG, P-I-G, AIG spent 9.7 

million dollars on federal lobbying last year, in one year.  And 

that was down on the previous year.  It’s contributed directly to 

candidates, to elected officials and parties, 9.3 million dollars 

since 1989.  It would have been much more but for campaign 

finance limits.  And the top recipients of the money include the 

Chair of the Senate Finance Committee and the Chair of the 

Senate Banking Committee.  Now, if that doesn’t tell you that 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 45. 

 

 

 

something is morally rotten at the heart of Washington, I don’t 

know what we have to show you.  [APPLAUSE]    

NELL MINOW   

If it doesn’t tell you that something is --    

JOHN DONVAN 

[OVERLAP]  Jim, Jim, I want to – Jim Chanos, you contrarian 

you have been sitting there silently on the side against the 

motion.   

JIM CHANOS 

[OVERLAP]  Well, just because the Keystone Kops couldn’t catch 

the gang that couldn’t shoot straight, doesn’t absolve that gang 

from its guilt.  In --  [APPLAUSE]  in not only looting the system 

with material intent but materially abrogating their fiduciary 

responsibility to their clients and the nation.  [APPLAUSE]    

JOHN DONVAN  

I want to, look, I want to bring the audience, you the audience 

into it at this point.  And it’ll take us about twenty-five seconds to 

get a sense of how many hands are up and we’ll come to you with 

microphones.  But we would love to bring you into this 

conversation now and by your responses already you are a 

terrific, a terrific audience.  So where is a, let’s bring one down to 

the center, to the gentleman in the blue tie.    

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

I have a question for Mr. Ferguson.  I believe you said that you 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 46. 

 

 

 

don’t believe in more regulation, only in smarter regulation.  But 

eliminating lobbying is that part of smarter regulation and if so, 

do you know a constitutional way to do it?    

NIALL FERGUSON  

Well, the regulation that seems to be more important than that, 

actually, has to do with bank capital adequacy.  I don’t think one 

can simply say that this financial crisis is a result of lobbying.  

That would be a stretch.  This crisis is much more to do with 

excessive leverage.  And if one simply regulates bank capital 

adequacy better, moves away from the self-regulation of Basel I 

and Basel II, I think many of the problems will be resolved.  I’ve 

written on this --   

NELL MINOW 

[OVERLAP, UNCLEAR]    

NIALL FERGUSON  

[OVERLAP]  Can I finish now?  I mean, I know you’re eager to 

have at me and I always welcome interruptions.  [LAUGHTER]  I 

just want to remind you that the victims in the crime that we’re 

discussing here are the taxpayers and voters of the United States 

who are now on the hoop for, what?, nine trillion dollars?  

[APPLAUSE]  Now, I’ve written actually on the subject --   

MAN  

[OVERLAP]  [UNCLEAR]   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 47. 

 

 

 

NIALL FERGUSON 

...of campaign finance reform.  And it seems to me extremely 

problematic.  You know, it’s been cited, I don’t know where you 

got this evidence from, Nell, that most other countries in the 

world don’t have this problem.  This is completely untrue.  The 

problem of corruption is endemic in most countries and the 

United States is very far from being the worst.  People talk about 

the BRICS – Brazil, Russia, India, China – all vastly more corrupt 

than the United States.  The exceptions are a tiny number of 

countries in Europe, which for cultural reasons, seem not to 

suffer from chronic corruption.  Those countries do not suffer 

from chronic corruption – not because of regulation.  There are 

many, many regulations that restricts lobbying and campaign 

finance in Europe.  And in some European countries they work 

and in others they don’t at all and they’re simply circumvented.  

So don’t delude yourself.  You can’t simply fix the problem of 

financial crises by eliminating political finance.    

NELL MINOW   

[OVERLAP]  You don’t mean, are you saying that there was no 

lobbying involved in reducing the capital requirements?  There 

was tremendous lobbying involved.    

NIALL FERGUSON  

[OVERLAP]  On the contrary.  I couldn’t agree more.  [UNCLEAR]    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 48. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN  

[OVERLAP]  I’d like to see Alex Berenson, who has been patient, 

now.   

ALEX BERENSON 

No, I think what we all would agree on is that in a very real way, 

Wall Street has set the conditions of its own regulation in the last 

fifteen years.  And clearly, that has gone too far.  [APPLAUSE]  

And Washington, I mean, to me, seems to work best when there 

are two strong sides debating an issue.  When it came to 

deregulating the banks there really wasn’t anybody saying, Don’t 

do it.  I mean, there were a few people who didn’t have any 

money.  But the commercial banks wanted it and the investment 

banks went along with it and nobody really disagreed.  So when 

you have a condition where the industry is essentially creating its 

own regulation, that’s no regulation.  And then it falls even more 

on the people, the executives, the managers in that industry to 

act like adults, which they did not do.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Niall Ferguson.   

NIALL FERGUSON 

One, [SMATTERING OF APPLAUSE]  one question’s for you, Alex.  

You represent the fourth estate here, the press.  What, where was 

the press when these things were being done?  I don’t remember 

extensive coverage of the relaxation of bank capital adequacy 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 49. 

 

 

 

rules in 2004 in The New York Times.  But perhaps I missed that 

Krugman column.  [LAUGHTER] [APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Let’s go back to some questions and I just want to point out the 

last question was a perfect example of a question.  Let’s follow 

that model toward the top.  A gentleman who caught my eye, and 

that’s you reaching for the microphone.    

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

Yes, thank you.  To go quickly from euphemisms, Washington 

being one, Wall Street being another – and to just not single out 

poor old Bernie Madoff as being the villain of the moment, can we 

have from the panel some of the names of the human beings who 

were me...behind the mechanisms that created this problem --  

such people as likely as Chuck Schumer, Barney Frank, Chris 

Dodd and others of that ilk.  [APPLAUSE]   

ALEX BERENSON 

I mean on the—you can also name Stan O’Neal and Chuck 

Prince, and Frank Raines, and Dick Fuld, I mean, you know, you 

can name the guys who took home, collectively, billions of dollars 

in the last five years.    

JOHN DONVAN  

John Steele Gordon just because you haven’t spoke in a while, 

would you like an in on this?    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 50. 

 

 

 

JOHN STEELE GORDON 

Frank Raines of course was a Washingtonian to his fingertips.  

And—    

NELL MINOW 

He’s the CEO of a public corporation.   

JOHN STEELE GORDON 

A public corporation that had unique tax advantages, and had an 

implicit government guarantee, even though legally there was no 

guarantee but it was implicit, and of course when they did 

collapse, the government came up and bailed them out.  Which is 

why they were able to borrow money at below-market rates, I 

mean so it was a—you know, Fannie and Freddie were economic 

chimeras created in Washington by the government, for purposes 

of making the government books look better.  And then they 

ended up with this beast.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Question from the far top.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Um…there, in the impetus for what happened, there’s been a 

lotta talk about greed, on the side of the… folks arguing for the 

resolution, um, as an excuse.  I’d like to hear you address the 

question though of incompetence.   [LAUGHS]  There—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 51. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN 

You said incompetence—?   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

Incompetence.  A lot of these companies, they didn’t just take 

risks, they weren’t just greedy, the leadership was incompetent, 

they ran their companies into the ground.  They’re bankrupt.  

And also because of the risk to the rest of the country and the 

world economy, taxpayers have bailed them out.  What about this 

question of incompetence.    

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you.  To which side are you addressing your question—   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

Oh, the—for the motion.   

JOHN DONVAN 

For the motion.    

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

Wait—   

JOHN DONVAN  

Nouriel—   

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

—I would not, you know, we know there are these issues in 

corporate governance because in any corporation, the 

shareholders cannot control the actions of the managers, there is 

[UNCLEAR] information the manager might want to maximize the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 52. 

 

 

 

rents and that leads to distortions, you know, the manager might 

[UNCLEAR] short of compensation and benefits, at the expense of 

the shareholders, but again, you know, Alan Greenspan, and 

he—when he made his testimony, he made the admission, he 

said—he admitted that one big mistake he thought that he made 

was that he thought the shareholders of companies could control 

the behavior of bankers and managers and because of that he 

didn’t think it was necessary to further regulate this financial 

institution.   For 30 years of corporate finance literature, that talk 

about these agents’ problem between principle and agents when 

there is [UNCLEAR] information.  It’s well-known for Chicago, to 

MIT, to anywhere else.   And he was clueless about it, how could 

he be clueless.  If he’d known about it, there were regulation that 

could have minimized those distortions of compensation, of 

[UNCLEAR] information, of taking excessive risk through 

leverage, controls through more liquidity, to reducing certain type 

of incentive.  They were clueless about it.   

[SMATTERING OF APPLAUSE] 

JOHN DONVAN  

Nell Minow, do I see you again agreeing with your opponents?    

NELL MINOW  

I think, listen, as I said there’s a lotta blame to go around, there’s 

a lot of incompetence to go around but when Paul Volcker says 

that he does not understand the derivative securities it seems to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 53. 

 

 

 

me we should have a Paul Volcker rule that if Paul Volcker does 

not understand it you should not be able to sell it.   

[LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

And a question from the center.   

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

And in 2000 we decided to completely deregulate any credit 

derivatives.  They should be over the counter, not on exchange, 

no settlement rules, no clearing rules, no counterpart rules, 

nothing.   That was a mistake of policy, there were people in 

policy, the CFDC were against it and SEC, the Fed, everybody 

else said no.  Should be a free market not regulated and that led 

to the disaster—   

ALEX BERENSON 

But—   

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

—of credit derivatives [UNCLEAR]—   

ALEX BERENSON 

But Dr. Doom—   

JOHN DONVAN 

Alex Berenson—   

ALEX BERENSON 

—wouldn’t that have—wouldn’t that have just driven—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 54. 

 

 

 

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

—policy procedure, we could have put them on an exchange—   

ALEX BERENSON 

But if we had done that, wouldn’t the firms have just traded 

those overseas.   

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

No, because, that’s why you have international rules and we have 

rules about avoiding—   

ALEX BERENSON 

So it’s—   

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

—that jurisdictional [UNCLEAR], you do—   

ALEX BERENSON 

So it’s now Brussels—   

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

—we do [UNCLEAR]—   

ALEX BERENSON 

—is the problem?  

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

Huh?   

ALEX BERENSON 

It’s now Brussels that we’re debating—   

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

Listen, [UNCLEAR] capital, we have international rules, there is a 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 55. 

 

 

 

agreement, there has to be coordination of international 

regulatory policy, ‘cause otherwise things are gonna go offshore.    

But instead of cracking down on offshore centers, we’re 

stimulating them, that was again a mistake of policy—  

JOHN DONVAN 

Jim Chanos.    

JIM CHANOS 

Well, actually after LTCM in 1998, Jerry Corrigan and others 

were charged with the effect of looking at credit derivatives, and 

basically went to the industry, who went down the self-regulatory 

route for clearing and other mechanisms.  So again we have a 

case of Washington going to the industry and the industry doing 

what it could, to drag its feet or skirt—skirt what was probably 

good policy all along.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Okay, we are halfway through the head-to-head par—round of 

the debate.  The motion is “Blame Washington More Than Wall 

Street for the Financial Crisis,” I’m your moderator, John 

Donvan, and we are now going to the center for a question.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

That’s for the against-the-motion side…it seems that incentives is 

like one of the main issues here.  Compensation’s been crazy, 

and incentive—incentive’s misplaced, it’s been all over the place, 

how do you change that, if not by better regulation, how do you 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 56. 

 

 

 

change human nature, which is basically like, they’ve been 

bending the rules, they’ve been swinging, as Roubini mentioned, 

he’s gonna be greedy in his business, I would be greedy in my 

business, I would do whatever it takes to maximize my profits 

and that’s what they’ve been doing, if it’s not about better 

regulation how do you, how do you really like, how do you change 

it?    

JOHN DONVAN  

Are you—are you literally asking how do you change human 

nature?   

NELL MINOW 

No, no—  [LAUGHTER]   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

I—that seems to be—   

JOHN DONVAN  

In a way you are—   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

—how to change the incentive—   

JOHN DONVAN 

And I think maybe it’s a rel—quite relevant question—   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

How to change, how do you change like how people are, the 

models [UNCLEAR] and how people are doing—  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 57. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN 

I see heads being put together on this one.   

ALEX BERENSON 

Aside from—   

JOHN DONVAN 

Alex Berenson—  

ALEX BERENSON 

Aside from alcohol I don’t know—  [LAUGHTER]  No…I, no, I 

think that’s a really good question.   As I said at the very 

beginning of my statement, that is not the question we’re 

debating, tonight.  We’re debating whether or not these firms 

should have behaved better, under the regime that they had.   

That said, I do think—I mean I think that what Niall says about 

increasing capital requirements is at the core, it’s a very, very 

good idea.  I can imagine, and I don’t know whether this could 

work in reality, there’d have to be some very, very smart people to 

figure out if it could work—  Sort of a dual system where there’s 

one group of very, very heavily regulated, essentially postal 

banks, that have, that have explicit government guarantees of 

insurance, that offer sort of plain vanilla products, that are, you 

know, essentially national, quasi-national institutions.   And then 

there’s another group where, anything goes.  And you can make 

or lose whatever you want, you can pay your employees whatever 

you want, but if you go under, you are not getting one dime and 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 58. 

 

 

 

that is the explicit charter that you’re operating under.  

[APPLAUSE]   And the difficulty is figuring out how those two 

systems would interface.  But if you could do that, then, 

hopefully we could avoid this problem in the future.   

JOHN DONVAN 

John Steele Gordon.   

JOHN STEELE GORDON 

I don’t know about human nature, I don’t—you can’t change it.  I 

mean that’s virtually by definition.  But I think it was Frances 

Bacon who said that to rule nature you must first obey it.  And 

what we have to do is simply understand human nature and take 

it into account when we set up our rules.   One thing about 

compensation, is that it’s been very fashionable in the United 

States for years now to have the CEO also be the chairman of the 

board.  Which makes him his own boss.  And whenever you are 

your own boss, you are going to overpay yourself.  [LAUGHTER]  

They—yeah, the CEO stuffs the board with people who are 

dependent upon him, other high-level management, I mean it 

seems to me that a corporation, unless you have enough stock to 

justify a seat on the board, if you work for that corporation you 

shouldn’t sit on the board.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Nouriel.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 59. 

 

 

 

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

There is a regulatory capture in almost every industry, the 

lobbyists take over the regulators and change things into their 

own interest.  But there’s only one industry, the financial 

industry, in which this thing leads, over and over again, to 

financial crisis, banking crisis.   They’re a disaster, they cost 

trillions of dollars.  And ask yourself what happens, and why that 

happens.  It happens for two reasons.  One because banks have 

deposit insurance and deposit guarantees.  Should we take some 

of the asset people money, you leverage like crazy, do crazy 

things.   If you gain it’s your money, otherwise it’s the taxpayer.  

Two, we have lender of last resort support.  When banks get in 

trouble the Fed comes to the rescue, and it’s a variant of this 

moral hazard of the bailout.   And that’s why these banking crises 

occur over and over and over again, and they’re becoming more 

disrupting, more expensive and so on.  That has to do key, with 

exactly our regulatory system, there is something wrong about it 

and if we don’t fix it these things are gonna happen, and the 

costs are gonna come even bigger, again,  people are greedy in 

every industry, people in every industry try to avoid regulation 

sometimes with lies, sometimes by cheating or avoiding, 

whatever.  That’s human nature, why it leads to disaster in 

financial industry, because we have the system.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 60. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN  

Sir, you have, you have the microphone in your hand, go ahead, 

please.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

Thank you.  This is addressed to both groups.  So it seems to me 

to reflect on which group deserves more blame, we have to make 

some assumptions and I think the participants are making 

assumptions, about what is behavior that’s reasonable to expect 

from one group or another group.   And then the one—the group 

that departs further from those reasonable expectations, gets 

more of the blame.  But I don’t think everybody agrees on what 

can reasonably be expected from each of the groups.   So, it’s 

assumed that, by some people, that you can reasonably expect 

greedy behavior, uh, from, uh, Wall Street types or from the 

people in that business, but not that it’s reasonable for Congress 

people in the political game to try to do things to keep—this is 

Nell Minow’s point of course—   

JOHN DONVAN  

[UNCLEAR] Niall Ferguson who’s—   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

So—   

JOHN DONVAN 

—arguing for the motion—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 61. 

 

 

 

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

—so how do you decide which are the reasonable expectations 

from the different groups, and won’t that tilt very strongly what 

blame you assign.   

JOHN DONVAN 

Niall Ferguson—   

NIALL FERGUSON 

This isn’t—  This isn’t rocket science.  One set of people under 

discussion, owes a duty to the public interest.  Those are the 

politicians and regulators.  That is why we call them public 

servants.  And the other group, let us take the investment 

bankers, because of course, Wall Street is composed of many 

different institutions, but let’s take the investment bankers.   

They owe a duty, to their shareholders, and also to bondholders.  

Now it’s quite interesting though the point hasn’t been made yet, 

that to all of these investment banks performed equally badly.  

The fate of Bear Sterns and Lehman Brothers illustrates that 

egregious bad management can achieve.  But the performance of 

Goldman Sachs was really significantly different.   Goldman 

actually didn’t lose substantial amounts of money, though its 

shareholders have certainly taken some punishment.  And the 

punishment has been meted out by the market, to the people 

who invested in those banks.   They will almost certainly end up 

with nothing, I’m fairly clear, that those people who invested in 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 62. 

 

 

 

financial securities will end up with very little indeed.  And I 

think that’s particularly true in the case of the big commercial 

banks.   

ALEX BERENSON 

But, Niall—   

NIALL FERGUSON 

And can—can I finish—  

ALEX BERENSON 

—that is exactly the point—   

NIALL FERGUSON 

—‘cause this is a really important point, Bank of America, and 

and of course Citigroup.  But the interests of the public are to be 

defended by people in Washington.   That is the big difference 

between these two groups, and that [UNCLEAR] is absolutely 

clear, that we have to lay the blame on Washington.  The failure 

of Bear Stearns, was a disaster from the point of view of people 

who invested in it.   But it became a disaster for the entire US 

economy, and indeed the world economy, because of failures of 

regulation.  And those seem to me to lie very squarely in 

Washington D.C.   

JOHN DONVAN 

A question from the—   

ALEX BERENSON 

I think you’ve just proven the point—  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 63. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN 

—woman in the center, please—   

ALEX BERENSON 

—that not every bank, failed, not every bank behaved equally 

badly—  

JOHN DONVAN 

This is Alex Berenson speaking.  Go ahead, Alex.    

ALEX BERENSON 

Not every bank is as responsible as every other bank for this 

crisis, Goldman is gonna get by a—you know, Goldman’s gonna 

get along fine, there are gonna be commercial banks that get 

along fine.   

NIALL FERGUSON 

It helps that AIG has been bailed out of course—  

ALEX BERENSON 

[LAUGHS]  Well, that’s true, that’s true—   

NIALL FERGUSON 

—let’s not lose sight of that.  [APPLAUSE]   

ALEX BERENSON 

But—   

NIALL FERGUSON 

The twist in the tale.   

ALEX BERENSON 

But wouldn’t you agree that that shows that there were 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 64. 

 

 

 

distinctions made on the street?   

JOHN DONVAN  

Ma’am, I encourage you to break in to this exchange—  

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Okay—  

JOHN DONVAN 

—with your question.  [LAUGHTER]    

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

I—I know that given all the discussion about greed at financial 

institutions many of us would assume that there were many good 

people at these companies who were simply afraid to say 

something about what they saw.  And my question is for anyone 

on the panel, can you envision a way to effectively institutionalize 

a financial company employee’s ability to report irregularities or 

essentially poor practices—    

ALEX BERENSON 

I think there’s a—   

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

— in ways that couldn’t be, that, that you can’t, simply avoid—   

ALEX BERENSON 

I’m not really sure I agree with that, I mean there were not 

whistle-blowers jumping up and calling the New York Times to 

tell us about things, and even Enron, and Jim knows, you know, 

Jim certainly knows more about Enron than anybody—  The 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 65. 

 

 

 

whistle-blowers really were a—   

NELL MINOW 

[INAUDIBLE]   

ALEX BERENSON 

Yeah, very, very late in the game—   

NELL MINOW 

Also Sarbanes-Oxley gives huge, huge protections to whistle-

blowers and incentives to whistle-blowers.  So I really don’t think 

that’s the problem.   

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

[INAUDIBLE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Ma’am, you can follow up.   

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

[INAUDIBLE]   

JOHN DONVAN 

Take the microphone to follow up just so we hear you.    

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

That’s a very risky thing to do to be a whistle-blower to the New 

York Times, if there are—there could be other ways in which 

confidentiality for employees is protected.   

NELL MINOW 

And there is under Sarbanes-Oxley.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 66. 

 

 

 

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

Okay, but not…okay, but, there probably are still—   

JOHN DONVAN 

Okay, I—I—I—   

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

—better ways to do it—   

JOHN DONVAN  

—I can’t let you get into the debate but thank you for the point, I 

wanna go to the young man in the front row, please.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

I have a question for Mr. Chanos?  You said earlier that, the 

government has never uncovered corruption, uh, I believe for the 

past 20 years which is [UNCLEAR] it’s all done by journalists, 

and short firms.   But does it—would that mean that Washington 

is at fault and granted, these companies shouldn’t have been 

corrupted in the first place.  But… wouldn’t—if they’re given the 

opportunity, wouldn’t it make sense they would, they would 

abuse, wouldn’t it be foolish to assume that they wouldn’t abuse 

this power that they have?    

JOHN DONVAN  

Question mark, thank you.  [LAUGHTER]  That’s a good question.    

JIM CHANOS 

Well…let’s just look at the response of this crisis.  In following, 

immediately following what Bear—the demise of Bear Sterns, you 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 67. 

 

 

 

had the CEO’s of our major banks and brokerage troop down to 

Washington.  What are the two things they requested, from 

Washington, following this stunning collapse almost out of the 

blue of one of our major brokerage firms.  Was it tightened 

regulatory surveillance, was it more regulators on the trading 

desk, was it something like that, no.   They asked for two things.  

They asked for short selling to be stopped, or curtailed, and they 

asked for a loosening in the accounting rules.  And on both 

cases, one was done, and changed, the other’s under 

consideration now.  So rather than tightening up things and 

making things more transparent, and giving incentives to market 

forces like short sellers, to ferret out fraud, and malfeasance, 

what has Wall Street done?  It’s come running to Washington to 

ask for more help, and more obfuscation and more opacity.  And 

that’s about as telling as you get.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Does the side for the motion wanna respond to that?  

[APPLAUSE]  John Steele Gordon.   

JOHN STEELE GORDON 

Washington could say no.  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]    

JOHN DONVAN  

[LAUGHS]  All right, short and sweet.  Gentleman at the top?   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Both sides acknowledged I think that one of the major questions 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 68. 

 

 

 

here is who’s more to blame.  So I wanna try to make it, maybe 

philosophical, and go back to the Keystone Kop examples, my 

question’s for against the motion.   So let’s take the Keystone 

Kops, couldn’t catch the gang, doesn’t make the gang less 

culpable.  Obviously everyone’s gonna agree.  But given that the 

job of the Keystone Kops in the first place, given the job they’ve 

taken on, is to keep order, if they’re asleep or corrupt, maybe 

drunk, aren’t they therefore even more wrong than the people 

who in the first place committed the action who had no 

responsibility, fiduciary duty, whatever you wanna call it, who 

had no responsibility beyond what they’ve signed to but whom—

are not nearly in the same position…   

JOHN DONVAN 

Thank you—   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

—of authority.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you.  Nell?   

NELL MINOW 

Well, the idea of the SEC when it was created in the 1930s, was 

that it would be about putting information into the market and 

letting the market sort everything out, the SEC, his authority is 

very limited, so they’re a Keystone Kop without a billy club.  And, 

it’s a good idea to consider that, again, and it’s a good idea to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 69. 

 

 

 

consider rewrapping some of that unwrapped regulation that we 

talked about, but right now Washington doesn’t have the tools, 

and doesn’t have the authority necessary, I think, to provide that 

kind of oversight.   

JOHN DONVAN  

And your opponent, Nouriel Roubini?   

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

Well, you know, I go back again to the issue of incentives on 

international scales, financial crises do not occur everywhere, 

there are countries like Canada and many others that have better 

regulators and supervised financial system, and these things 

don’t occur.   It’s not that Canadians are more moral or less 

greedy or less incompetent or more competent or more arrogant 

than anybody else and, same thing for Europeans and Asians 

and you name it.  Human nature is similar.   And by the way they 

are not crooks, you know, everybody responded to incentives, 

everybody wanted to maximize profit returns and whatever, that’s 

what market economies are all about, but we know that human 

behavior can lead to excesses in society, that’s why we have 

institution in society, otherwise the law of the jungle.   And in 

this case of financial market you know that greed and excesses 

can lead to damaging effects, that’s why prudential regulation, 

supervision of financial institution, is so much more important so 

at the end of the day, it’s good public policy, it makes a difference 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 70. 

 

 

 

between crisis occurring or not occurring, that’s the lesson of the 

last 50 years, it’s not about human nature, or greed or being 

criminal—   

JOHN DONVAN  

We have time for one more question.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

This is for, against the motion, it seems like this is a, uh, 

chicken, which came first, chicken or the egg.    

JOHN DONVAN  

Do you mind if I tell the panel that actually both sides can 

address your question, we’ll be—   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

Sure, absolutely—   

JOHN DONVAN 

—[UNCLEAR] the motion, but please, everyone consider this your 

final question—   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

It may be so appropriately chicken versus the egg, chicken being 

Washington, being afraid to do what’s right, and Wall Street 

who’s laid a ginormous egg.   [LAUGHTER]  If it is a chicken-

versus-egg scenario, and, as Mr. Gordon  pointed out that we 

have a history of financial crises every 20 years for the most part, 

uh, wouldn’t it seem to be that Wall Street since our country was 

founded first and foremost by entrepreneurs and businessmen, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 71. 

 

 

 

uh, that set out to form their own government, that it would 

actually be driven more so by Wall Street than the government 

that they formed?  

JOHN DONVAN 

Alex Berenson.    

ALEX BERENSON 

I think, just to address that and to address the previous question 

‘cause I think the previous question is a very good one, do you 

blame the cops or do you blame the robbers, if it—you know, the 

robbers are gonna steal isn’t it the cops’ job to stop them.  I think 

you can take the Keystone Kops analogy too far.  We want to have 

a banking system that makes loans.   We want credit to be 

available to people, you know, the invention of the credit card, is 

actually one of the great inventions in American soc—you know, 

in the world in the 20th century, it really is, it’s the 

democratization of credit, where you didn’t have to go in and get 

down on one knee before a banker, to get a loan, was meaningful 

to people.   Being able to get a house and a mortgage is 

meaningful to people.  So what we don’t want—so, you know, 

they’re robbers, but they’re not robbers, they’re people serving a 

useful societal function.   And it’s up to…  So—  [LAUGHS]  So 

that makes—  I know, I know, I can’t believe I just said that 

either.  [LAUGHTER]    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 72. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN  

I think Niall Ferguson is trying to get in here—   

ALEX BERENSON 

But wait, let me just quickly fin—   

JOHN STEELE GORDON 

As your attorney I would advise you to stop speaking 

immediately—   

ALEX BERENSON 

Let me just quickly finish.  [LAUGHTER]  Quickly finish.  That 

makes the job—  

NIALL FERGUSON 

—bad guys, I’m getting there.   

ALEX BERENSON 

That—  So, that means that the regulators, are not strictly out to 

arrest them or bust them, we have to set up a somewhat 

permissive regulatory system to allow them to operate, and then 

hope-slash-insist, that they actually don’t run the system into the 

ground, which, we didn’t do that—   

NIALL FERGUSON 

Can we do chickens and eggs now, because I’m getting bored of 

cops and robbers.  The—  [LAUGHTER]  Far be it from me to 

lecture an audience like this about American history but it seems 

to me that, the question wasn’t really framed quite correctly.  

From—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 73. 

 

 

 

JOHN DONVAN  

I think you’re handling it okay, actually—   

NIALL FERGUSON 

That—thanks.  [LAUGHTER]  The—from the very inception of the 

United States there was a profound tension, between Washington 

and New York.  Alexander Hamilton’s vision of the United States 

as a financial power was not shared by all the founding fathers 

and indeed James Madison was extremely skeptical about it.   

That’s why there was consistent resistance to the creation of a 

central bank in the United States, that lasted right up until 1913 

with the Bank of the United States being chartered and then 

gotten rid of twice, in the course of the 19th century, so—   I think 

we need to see this as part of a long argument, within American 

political culture.  How powerful should New York be.  And should 

those other parts of the United States, let’s call it Main Street, 

should they in fact dominate.   And I think what’s happened in 

the last 10 years, is that New York did get the upper hand.  And I 

think the rest of the country, is ready for a backlash.   

JOHN DONVAN  

Ladies and gentlemen, that concludes Round 2 of our debate.  

[APPLAUSE]  So we are in the final stretch, in a very short time 

you the audience will decide who is the winner.  Recall that at the 

start of the debate we asked you whether you agreed or disagreed 

with the motion before us, “Blame Washington More Than Wall 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 74. 

 

 

 

Street for the Financial Crisis,” before the debate, 42 percent of 

you were for the motion, 30 percent against, and 28 percent 

undecided, we will now have summarizing comments by each 

side of two minutes each.   And I wanna ask you at the very end,  

I will make an announcement of the winner, and at that point I 

would ask for your forbearance, give us 30 seconds to end the 

NPR broadcast, it oh so pleasant to have the sound of applause.   

And I will at a certain point raise my hand, I would ask you to 

applaud and then I’ll bring it down and everyone can go home.  

So just—  [LAUGHTER]  It’ll be this.  That’s clear?  We’re not 

gonna do the rehearsal, it’s not kindergarten, you know— okay.   

Round 3, summarizing comments from each side, first 

summarizing…against the motion, “Blame Washington More 

Than Wall Street for the Financial Crisis,” Alex Berenson, 

investigative reporter for the New York Times.    

ALEX BERENSON 

I wanna thank Niall, for sort of making our point with his very 

last remark where he said that New York became more powerful 

than the rest of the country [LAUGHS].  I do think that to some 

extent all six of us forgot something when we were presented with 

this question that only came out in the debate in the discussion 

in the last 20 minutes, and that is, the internationalization of 

the— of the financial system.   That when in 2000 the banks said 

to Washington, if we don’t want these regulations on credit 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 75. 

 

 

 

derivatives, what they also said was, if you force this on us, we 

are going to go elsewhere.   And, you know, it was only a few 

months ago that we were hearing that London was gonna be the 

primary financial center in the world, followed possibly by 

Shanghai and Hong Kong within about five to 10 years, now, I 

think the city in London is getting even more badly hurt right 

now than New York.   

 

But the point is, actually that Washington-versus-Wall Street is a 

false dichotomy because the banks became so powerful within 

the sphere of the financial world, that they essentially told 

Washington, if you try to regulate us strictly, you are going to lose 

our business, jobs are gonna go overseas, and there will be no 

regulation at all.   So you can have the SEC, and the Fed, and 

weak regulation, or you can have no regulation, those are the 

choices that you face.  And they meant it.  There were jobs 

shifted to London, a lot of jobs shifted to London, jobs shifted to 

Hong Kong.  And I think that when you forget that, it becomes 

easier to blame Washington, if you remember that, you will vote 

against this resolution, you will put the blame where it belongs, 

on Wall Street.  Thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Summing up for the motion, “Blame Washington More Than Wall 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 76. 

 

 

 

Street for the Financial Crisis,” John Steele Gordon, author of An 

Empire of Wealth.    

JOHN STEELE GORDON 

Well, I just wanna say that while Wall Street certainly needs 

reform, it always needs reforms and it’s constantly being 

reformed, it has been for 200 years.  But it doesn’t need reform 

as badly as Washington, specifically Congress.   Which is a 

profoundly sick institution.  [APPLAUSE]  Institutions tend to 

evolve in ways that benefit their elites, and if you want the poster 

child for that, it is the United States Congress.  I also wanna just 

add one thing on the…  People on the other side have been 

saying that Wall Street took all this—took their checkbooks down 

to Washington and lobbied to get the regulation they wanted 

rather than stricter regulation.  And actually said, therefore, 

Congressmen were the victims of this.   I’m sorry, but Wall Street 

was not debauching a virgin, it was paying a harlot.  

[LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]  Thank you very much.    

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, John Steele Gordon.  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]  

Summarizing against the motion, Jim Chanos, founder of short-

selling investment firm, Kynikos Associates.    

JIM CHANOS 

Boy, how do I follow that one.  [LAUGHTER]  Well, again, we’ve 

had a lot of lofty philosophical questions batted back and forth, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 77. 

 

 

 

but there have been very, very few facts put forth tonight.  And I 

wanna stay with the facts.  So we’ll just consider one instance, 

Lehman Brothers.   Which when it failed, had adequate 

regulatory capital, and was still profitable in its trailing 12 

quarters.  Yet when the credit default swaps were settled for 

Lehman Brothers, a month later, its debts were marked down 90 

cents on the dollar.   Now its debts at the time in terms of funded 

debt were $150 billion, stay with me on this, numbers are 

important when it comes to Wall Street.  So, 90 cents off on that 

dollar bill means the debt was impaired by $135 billion.  Lehman 

bonds still trade around 10 to 15 cents on the dollar, six months 

later.  There’s $20 billion in equity at the time, that tells us that 

the hole in Lehman’s balance sheet was roughly $150 to $160 

billion.   To put that in perspective the hole in Enron when the 

dust cleared, roughly was $60 to $70 billion.  Lehman was twice 

as bad as Enron.  We haven’t gotten to AIG yet, or Bear Stearns, 

or God knows what else.  Ladies and gentlemen, malfeasance 

trumps incompetence for the purpose of this resolution, and I 

urge you to remember that when you vote.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Jim Chanos, Kynikos Associates.  Nouriel Roubini, 

Professor of Economics and International Business at New York 

University’s Stern School of Business will summarize for the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 78. 

 

 

 

motion.   

NOURIEL ROUBINI 

Well, you know, it’s not a debate about robbers and cops because 

there is a huge amount of evidence that actually, financial 

development is very beneficial for economic activity.  Companies 

are more financially developed, provide lots of services, you know.   

Credit cards, mortgages, commercial real estates, insurance, risk 

hedging, you name it, it’s very important and beneficial but we 

know that when there is financial innovation sometimes becomes 

excessive, there is asset bubble, there are credit bubble, 

excessive restaking.    

 

People become greedy and all the rest, and you can have a 

system that is so regulated like some countries, like India, 

whenever there’s a bank that is ever failing, but you won’t 

actually, the market economy where sometimes, some banks fail. 

But you don’t want a system which everybody’s collapsing, you 

have systemic risk.  And the distinction there is you want 

innovation, like in any country because it’s gonna be beneficial, 

but you want to avoid crisis, and to avoid crisis, you need 

appropriate rules, institution, prudential regulation of the 

financial system.   Not too much, not too little, it’s a trade-off, it’s 

not a black-and-white.  And the difference between a system that 

works, that has innovation and provides benefits, and avoids a 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 79. 

 

 

 

crisis and one which crisis occur over and over again, has 

nothing to do with Wall Street or the greedy bank as you name it.   

Has to do with the quality of public policy.  Proper supervision 

and regulation.  That’s the distinction, has been always the case 

across countries, across history, so let’s look at the big picture.    

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Nouriel Roubini.  [APPLAUSE]  The motion is “Blame 

Washington More Than Wall Street for the Financial Crisis,” and 

summarizing her position against the motion, Nell Minow, editor 

and co-founder of The Corporate Library.    

NELL MINOW 

Politicians are accountable through the political system, you 

don’t like ‘em, don’t vote for them.  You wanna vote for 

candidates who don’t take money from lobbyists, be my guest, 

that was a policy that got Barack Obama in part elected.  That’s 

great.   But the people who stole money, to send it to 

Washington, are the people on Wall Street.  Is there one 

shareholder of Bear Stearns or Lehman, who wanted that money 

to be used to weaken regulation?  No it wasn’t, there’s a huge 

moral hazard involved there.   The same moral hazard that 

involved them paying themselves hundreds of millions of dollars.  

The return on investment for CEO pay is less than a piggy bank.  

And that’s because they’ve corrupted the system.  They didn’t 

need any help from Washington for that.  They did it themselves.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 80. 

 

 

 

So please, vote against the resolution.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Nell Minow, and finally, summarizing for the motion, 

Niall Ferguson, Professor of History at Harvard.    

NIALL FERGUSON 

Well ladies and gentlemen, it’s not very often that you hear 

Washington D.C. defended, by a journalist, a former government 

attorney, and a short seller.  [LAUGHTER]  The journalist told us 

it would all have been absolutely fine if the banks had been as 

run as—had been run as well as the airlines, when did you last 

fly Continental, Alex?  [LAUGHTER]   Jim Chanos told us that 

corporate fraud is endemic in corporate America, and this goes 

from Enron to Madoff.  What they agree about, and here they do 

agree with us, is that, in many ways, Washington is in hock to 

Wall Street.   The difference is that Nell Minow thinks that 

Washington, the legislators, poor things, are the victims, in this 

strange case.  Now, that is where we part company.  On our side 

we see them anything as the victims, we see them as the key 

perpetrators.   And let us not forget just how far this has gone.  

Who was, Nell, the second biggest recipient of donations from 

Fannie and Freddie?  Yes, it was the President of the United 

States, Barack Obama.   And let’s not forget that among the firms 

that contributed most generously to his campaign were Goldman 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 81. 

 

 

 

Sachs, Citigroup, J.P. Morgan, UBS, and Morgan Stanley.  What 

we need to contemplate, ladies and gentlemen, is the Latin 

Americanization of the American political system.  [APPLAUSE]   

 

This symbiotic and indeed corrupt relationship between Wall 

Street and Washington is the thing that is rotten at the heart of 

the United States, it is the principal explanation for this crisis, 

and that brings me to the key question you have to ask 

yourselves.   Who has to defend the public interest.  Is it the 

investment bankers, the hedge fund managers, or is it your 

elected representatives.  Ladies and gentlemen, it is perfectly 

clear, that it is Washington that has failed to defend the public 

interest, and I fear, it is continuing to fail to do so.  Please do vote 

for the motion.   

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN DONVAN  

Thank you, Niall Ferguson, and that concludes the 

argumentation portion of the evening, it is now time for the 

moment of truth, in which you the audience pick the winner.  

Now you voted earlier when you came in, on the motion which is 

“Blame Washington More Than Wall Street for the Financial 

Crisis.”  We’re asking you to vote a second time.  [PAUSE]  Does 

anyone need any further instruction in the voting process, 

everyone understands.  Right.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 82. 

 

 

 

[PAUSE—AUDIENCE SOUND]  

 

All right, we’re gonna lock the keypads, and the results are being 

tabulated, we’re about…55 seconds away from knowing the 

outcome of this debate and while we are waiting, I think you are 

going to wanna hear this…  [PAUSE]  Next month’s topic…is 

rather salty.  First I wanna thank the audience and the panelists 

for a terrific evening and you were actually a spectacularly good 

audience with great questions, and a great sense of presence.  

[APPLAUSE]   Our next debate will be Tuesday, April 21st, the 

motion is, “It is Wrong to Pay for Sex.”  [LAUGHTER]  Panelists 

for the motion are Melissa Farley, a psychologist for Prostitution 

Research and Education, Catharine MacKinnon, a professor at 

the University of Michigan Law School, Wendy Shalit, author of A 

Return to Modesty.   

 

Panelists against the motion are Sidney Biddle Barrows, better 

known as the Mayflower Madame, Tyler Cowen, a Professor of 

Economics at George Mason University, and Lionel Tiger, 

professor of Anthropology at Rutgers University, this debate will 

take place here at Rockefeller University’s Caspary Auditorium.   

And all of our debates can be heard on more than 170 NPR 

stations across the country.  Please check your local NPR 

member station listings for the dates, and the times of the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street” (3/17/09) Page 83. 

 

 

 

broadcasts and finally, copies of books by our panelists, as well 

as past DVD’s, are on sale in the lobby and I read some of these 

books in preparation for this debate, and they are well worth 

picking up and taking a look at.   

 

So you have heard the arguments, you have voted twice now— 

Our winner will be determined by the team that changed most 

minds.  To remind you, when you came in…42 percent of you 

sided with the motion, “Blame Washington More Than Wall Street 

for the Financial Crisis,” 30 percent of you were against the 

motion, 28 percent of you were undecided,  and now the results 

of the final vote, 60 percent of you are for the motion, 31 percent 

against…  [APPLAUSE]  9 percent undecided, the side for the 

motion wins… congratulations to them, I’m John Donvan… 

thank you to Intelligence Squared US.   

[APPLAUSE] 

 

END 


