
 
MEDIA TRANSCRIPTS, INC. 

41 WEST 83rd STREET  NEW YORK, N.Y.  10024   (212)  362-1481 

 

 The Rosenkranz Foundation/ 

Intelligence Squared US 

DATE 5/16/07 

PROGRAM Intelligence Squared U.S. 

Beware the Dragon: A Booming China 

Spells Trouble for America 

 

BGT NO.  . 

BEGIN DEBATE  

ROBERT ROSENKRANZ  

I’m Robert Rosenkranz, Chairman of Intelligence Squared.  With 

me is Dana Wolfe, our Executive Producer, and it’s my pleasure 

to welcome you tonight.  This is the final debate, the eighth 

debate of our inaugural season.   We launched this debate series 

with the goal of raising the level of public discourse in this 

country, and I think we’re very gratified with the reception that 

we’ve received.  I want to express my thanks to National Public 

Radio, through whose auspices tonight’s debate will heard in over 

sixty radio stations around the country, including most of the 

major ones.  WNYC is producing the ra-, the radio broadcast.  

The format is a debate in which three panelists on each side try 

to persuade you to vote their way on a resolution.  The resolution 

tonight is, “A booming China spells trouble for America.”  Well, 

why did we pick this topic?  First of all, it seems clear that the 

emergence of China as an, as an economic superpower is 

perhaps the most dramatic economic event in our lifetime.  Since 

China’s economic liberalization in 1978, the average person in 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 2. 

 

 

 

China is about twelve times better off.  Pretty extraordinary for a 

single generation.  With some 1.3 billion souls, China has 

orchestrated the biggest improvement in material well being in 

human history.  Chinese imports provide about a thousand 

dollars in increased purchasing power for the average American 

family.  It’s become the fastest growing market for U.S. exports, a 

very exciting, uh, set of investment opportunities for U.S. 

business.  It’s offered the world a almost a “how to do it” manual 

for transitioning from a state controlled economy, uh, to an 

economy where the private sector is larger and the state sector 

smaller than virtually any developed country in the world, save 

the United States.  So why tonight’s debate?  Where might the 

trouble lie for America?  Well, perhaps it’s in our two hundred 

and thirty billion dollar trade deficit.  Perhaps it’s because a 

million eight hundred thousand American jobs have been lost.  

Perhaps it’s because China’s, uh, appetite for raw materials, 

natural resources has, uh, pushed it toward very close 

relationships with countries like Iran. With China’s military 

buildup,  which was most recently, demonstrated by its ability to 

destroy an orbiting satellite.   As in so much of America’s high-

tech military resou-, relies on satellite communications for 

commanded control, this was a particularly strategic, 

provocation.  Interestingly, this debate does not fall along 

traditional ideological lines.  My, perhaps list, energizes the anti-



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 3. 

 

 

 

Globalization left, as well as security hawks on the right.  But 

which side can marshal the facts and analysis to support their 

view?  Well, we have an exceptionally strong panel this evening.  

Our moderator is British journalist James Harding, who since 

last year has been Business and City Editor of The Times  of 

London, our media sponsor.  And prior to this, James was with 

the, Financial Times, serving as Washington Bureau Chief, Media 

Editor, and prior thereto as correspondent in China, where he 

opened the Shanghai office, or Shanghai bureau, I should say.  

And it’s now my pleasure to pass the evening on to James.   

JAMES HARDING  

Thank you, Bob. [APPLAUSE] Thank you very much, Bob.  I’d like 

to welcome you all to the eighth Intelligence Squared debate here 

in the U.S.  Let me give you a brief rundown of what we’re gonna 

do this evening.  Um, first, the proposer of the motion will start 

by presenting their side of the argument.  The opposition will 

follow.  And then each person will get a maximum of eight 

minutes, and we will go back and forth from one side to the 

other.  Second, when all six speakers are finished with their 

opening remarks, I will open up the floor to brief questions from 

the audience.  Third, when the Q&A is complete, each debater 

will make a final statement lasting not more than two minutes 

per person.  And fourth, after the closing statement is made, 

you’ll vote on tonight’s motion with the keypad that is attached to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 4. 

 

 

 

the armrest of your seat.  Fifth and last, I will announce the 

results.  Now, before hearing from our panelists, I’d like to start 

with a pre-debate vote.  You’ll see that, on the armrest to your 

left, there is a keypad, uh, it looks like this.  And for audience 

members sitting along the aisle, you’ll find it just to your right.   

Uh, sorry, the keypad is, [LAUGHS], the way, it’s the one that I’m 

holding up here in my right hand, it should be on your right hand 

side, I apologize. I think you’ll find in the debate, there won’t be 

such confusion between left and right. [LAUGHTER] Now, after 

my prompt, what I’d like you to do is press “one” for the motion, 

press “two” against the motion, and if you’re undecided press 

“three.” Please begin voting now.  [LAUGHS]   Apparently it is on 

the left, but I hope you’ve all got one [BACKGROUND 

LAUGHTER], and as long as you’ve got one, you voted with it. 

[And judging by the hum of excitement, you’ve made your views 

known, and I will let you know the results of the vote later on this 

evening.  Now, let me in-, introduce the panel to you.  For the 

motion.  Firstly, we have Bill Gertz, who’s the defense and 

national security reporter for the Washington Times, an author, 

and a uh, Fox News analyst.   Then, we have Professor John 

Mearsheimer, the R. Wendell Harrison Distinguished Service 

Professor of Political Science, and the co-director of the program 

on international security policy at the University of Chicago.   

And finally, Michael Pillsbury, consultant to the office of the U.S. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 5. 

 

 

 

Secretary of Defense on future planning issues, and advisor to 

the Pentagon on Asian Affairs and long-term defense planning.  

Against the motion, there’s the founder and chairman and chief 

executive officer of the McGregor, of McGregor & Company, 

author, and the former chief executive of Dow Jones in China, 

James McGregor.   Then we have Daniel H. Rosen, the principal 

of China Strategic Advisory, adjunct associate professor at 

Columbia University and visiting fellow with the Institute of 

International Economics.  And Ambassador J. Stapleton Roy, 

managing director of Kissinger Associates and a three-time 

ambassador serving Singapore, the People’s Republic of China, 

and Indonesia.  Right, those were the formalities, now let’s get on 

with the debate, starting with Bill Gertz, over to you. [APPLAUSE]  

BILL GERTZ 

The question before the house is, “Is a booming China, does a 

booming China spell trouble for America?”  The answer, in my 

view, is a resounding yes.  In the next few minutes, I’m going to 

explain why.  But first, what I call “the China threat,” which is 

something that Beijing likes to refer to as “the China threat 

theory,” is in fact real.  Uh, it is a danger and it is growing.  Um, 

as a, as the late CIA analyst and White House National Security 

Council official, Constantin Menges put it in his book  China: The 

Gathering Threat, he said the reason that China poses a threat is 

because, despite its economic reforms, it is today ruled by a 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 6. 

 

 

 

nuclear armed Communist dictatorship.  This is the source of, of 

the trouble.  I’ve identified what I call eleven sources of trouble 

for the United States from China, and I’m going to list them for 

you, and then talk briefly with the time remaining on, in some 

detail on it.  The first is China’s military buildup.  Number two is 

the danger of war over Taiwan.  Number three is expansionism 

over energy resources.  Number four is the proliferation of 

weapons of mass destruction and missiles.  Number five is 

massive intelligence operations to steal U.S. secrets and 

technology.  Number six is influence operations and so-called 

money diplomacy.  Number seven is unfair trade practices, 

including currency valuation manipulation.  Number eight, 

intellectual property theft.  Number nine, human rights abuses.  

Number ten, religious repression.  And number eleven, 

environmental degradation and global warming.  To start with, 

the most serious trouble for America from China is China’s 

military buildup.  On January eleventh of this year, China 

conducted an unprecedented anti-satellite missile test.  They 

fired a missile that traveled through space and hit a low Earth 

orbit satellite, a Chinese weather satellite, destroying it and 

creating, uh, sixteen thousand pieces of debris, which pose a 

threat to other satellites.  U.S. official were shocked by this 

development because U.S. intelligence estimates of China’s 

military have been stating for years that China is ten, fifteen, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 7. 

 

 

 

maybe twenty years behind the United States.   That it is so far 

behind that there is no way China’s military could pose a threat.  

What the Chinese ASAT [anti-satellite] test showed was that 

China is not seeking to follow the U.S. missile for missile, ship for 

ship, submarine for submarine.  They’re going after niche 

weapons, they’re trying to leap ahead with special technology, 

and they’re doing this in a number of key areas, one of which is 

anti-satellite weapons.  Officials in Washington estimate that by, 

within the next, uh, six years, China will have the capability of 

destroying all U.S. low Earth orbit satellites.   Basically, this 

could be the modern day equivalent of a space Pearl Harbor 

against the United States if there were a conflict over Taiwan.  

Regarding Taiwan, the danger of war over the Taiwan Strait 

continues.  China has not renounced the, its plan to use force to 

retake the island.  It is applying pressure, across the board, uh, 

to pressure this democracy.  It is succeeding in many ways to 

influencing U.S. policy in ways that would diminish support for 

this traditional ally.  The danger of China expanding to gain 

resources is kind of a new, uh, source of trouble that has been 

identified by some studies in the Pentagon one of which was 

called the so-called “string of pearls strategy.”  It shows that 

China, uh, is developing a string of pearls, bases, alliances along 

a path going from the Middle East, where all of its, much of its oil 

comes from, all the way to China.  There are very much concerns 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 8. 

 

 

 

that because energy is so, uh, integral to China’s modernization 

effort, that China at some point will have to expand militarily, 

perhaps the Russian Far East, perhaps Southeast Asia, uh, to 

take over, uh, places that have, uh, valuable oil and gas 

resources.  Intelligence operations.  Uh, this is a subject that I 

have focused on in my recent book.  It also, uh, highlights the 

case of Chi Mak, who was a Chinese intelligence agent, recently 

convicted in California of uh, of being an unregistered agent of 

the Chinese government.  It’s part of a, a mushrooming spy case, 

more of which will be coming out in, in the coming weeks and 

months, uh, which shows that China has been very successful in 

stealing some of the most advanced U.S. weapons technology, 

including the next generation quiet electric drive for our war 

ships, uh, secrets about our submarine force, and as well as the 

AEGIS battle management system, which is the heart of the, the 

modern Navy.  As for influence operations, this is another area 

where China has been extremely successful in influencing 

policies, uh, against the United States.  We see this through so-

called, what one Chinese defector called “money diplomacy,” uh, 

buying up former U.S. officials, and using those officials to lobby 

against policies that China doesn’t like.  Uh, this is having a, a 

deleterious effect on the U.S. economy and U.S. policy because 

it’s preventing the United States from truly understanding the 

directions and goals of China’s military modernization and its, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 9. 

 

 

 

uh, its general modernization as well.  Representative Randy 

Forbes, the chairman of the China caucus in the House of 

Representatives estimates that China spends upwards of one 

hundred million dollars annually, uh, on these influence 

operations.   Unfair trade practices and currency issues, as well 

as, uh, uh, intellectual property theft.   These issues are fairly 

well known, but I would like to highlight one issue surrounding 

the whole trade question.  The main policy for the United States 

towards China has been to trade with China as a way to seek a 

liberalized Chinese government and political system.   

Unfortunately, the idea of trading with China as a liberal, a 

liberalizing factor is not working.  In fact, just the other, just the 

opposite is happening.  Uh, many feel that China’s buildup, its 

military buildup is being benefited by its economic growth, but 

yet we have seen little or no political reform in China.  This is a, a 

very serious source of trouble for the United States.  On human 

rights abuses, I would also point out how, at its core, China has 

never fully resolved that the Tiananmen massacre in 1989, when 

pro-democracy protesters…  

JAMES HARDING 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES] One minute.  

BILL GERTZ  

 …occupied the square.  Um, as well, religious re-, repression is 

also in this field, as well as environmental degradation.  Uh, as 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 10. 

 

 

 

many as seven out of ten Chinese major rivers are now dead.  

This debate has often been couched as, as between engagement 

and contained, but really, the, the issue here is that what China 

needs is Democracy, and that is really the, the solution to 

mitigating these sources of trouble for the United States.  

[APPLAUSE]  

JAMES HARDING  

Bill Gertz, many thanks indeed.  A model of timeliness.  Now to, 

um, stand against the motion “Beware the Dragon: A booming 

China spells trouble for America,” I call upon Stapleton Roy. 

[BACKGROUND NOISE]   

J. STAPLETON ROY 

Good evening.  Let me begin with a dangerous confession.  I love 

Fu Manchu novels.  [BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]  I have read 

them all, I have seem every movie version that I can get my hand 

on.  Nothing sends shudders up my spine so much as 

contemplating sinister Chinese scheming to control the world. 

[BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]  So when I was confronted with the 

question of whether a booming China spells trouble for the 

United States, my natural instinct was to think of Fu Man Chu, 

and to give a resounding yes.  But then I remembered that I had 

majored in History in college, not in the world’s great literature.  

When you look at what’s happening in China in terms of history 

and not in terms of fantasy fiction, you are forced to a very 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 11. 

 

 

 

different conclusion.   I grew up in wartime China, I was in China 

as a high school student at the time of the Communist revolution 

in 1949, I visited China three times during the turmoil of the 

Cultural Revolution.  When I visit China now, the situation is so 

different and so much better than China was in those days.   

Nevertheless, the question before you is a serious one.  Any 

country of 1.3 billion people can spell trouble for us or for the 

global system.   I have dealt with China professionally for over 

thirty years, it has been troublesome throughout that period, our 

relations have improved, we have done well.  But this is true that 

China can cause trouble, whether it’s in boom or bust.  A China 

that is floundering with a sense of grievance against the world 

and disaffected with the international system would be a greater 

danger than a booming China that can feed and clothe its people, 

educate them domestically and abroad, buy vast amounts of U.S. 

goods and services, and benefit from the international system.  

That’s a far preferable outcome.  Can we handle China’s 

troublesome aspects?  Of course we can.  We’re the world’ 

premiere military power.  We have the most large, we have the 

largest and most productive economy in the world.  We’re 

improving our military technology at a rate faster than China is.  

We have the world’s, I mentioned the economy, we’re a global 

leader in science and technology, our schools and graduate 

schools are the envy of the world.  The one requirement for 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 12. 

 

 

 

handling any trouble that China causes is that we manage our 

domestic and international affairs so that we don’t squander the 

enormous advantages that we have.  Remember, trouble for us 

spells even bigger trouble for China.  The advantage is on our 

side, not China’s.  Seven successive U.S. presidents over a space 

of thirty-five years have discovered that contain-, that containing 

troubles and developing common interests with China benefits 

us.  Three successive generations of Chinese leaders have come 

to the same conclusion.  Such a track record should give us 

confidence.  What’s more, experience over the last fifteen years of 

China’s rapid growth shows clearly that a booming China offers 

enormous opportunities for the United States, and holds out the 

prospect of positive change in the future.  China’s rapid growth 

has created an enormous middle class, concentrated in China’s 

coastal provinces.  This new middle class enjoys a level of 

affluence unthinkable in the 1970’s.  These middle class Chinese 

are educated, entrepreneurial, and outward looking.   They have 

more in common with the middle classes elsewhere in Asia than 

they have with the on-, the backward parts of their own country.  

They represent the building blocks for China’s eventual transition 

to a more representative form of government.   China’s society is 

remarkably more open than it was before.  Hundreds of 

thousands of China’s best and brightest have been sent to the 

west, and primarily to the United States to study, the work, and 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 13. 

 

 

 

the spend years here.  Western educated Chinese now occupy 

significant positions at all levels of government, business, and 

education in China.  Totally absent thirty years ago.  In essence, 

China has abandoned Marxism and Leninism and class struggle 

in favor of Marxism eco-, uh, market economics [BACKGROUND 

LAUGHTER], and promotion of a harmonious society.  Obviously, 

as China’s economy continues to grow, and as its military 

capabilities improve, we have to consider the possibility that a 

more powerful and prosperous China will become a security 

threat.   A highly nationalistic China under poor leaders or under 

bad leaders would pose serious problems for us and for the 

global community.  Two aspects are of particular concern.  

China’s military spending has been growing at double digit rates 

for the last fifteen years, China’s defense forces are preparing for 

Taiwan scenarios, that include the possibility of U.S. 

intervention.  Does this mean we should sound the alarms, and 

assume that conflict with China is inevitable over Taiwan?  The 

answer is no.  The situation calls for vigi-, vigilance, not for 

alarm. U.S. military leaders are not sitting on their thumbs.  

They’re constantly improving our force posture, they’re pointedly 

confident that we can handle any challenges and they believe 

that conflict can be avoided.  Such confidence is warranted.  We 

in China have developed an effective framework from ma-

managing the Taiwan issue.  Both countries, the United States 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 14. 

 

 

 

and China have stated that they are opposed to unilateral 

changes in the status quo with respect to Taiwan.  In addition, 

enormous common interests have developed on both sides of the 

Taiwan Strait, interests missing, before we befriended China.  

Taiwan has brought over a hundred billion dollars of investment 

into the mainland.  Millions of Taiwanese visit the mainland.  

Taiwan exports more across the Taiwan Straits now than it does 

to the United States.  In the meantime, Taiwan runs its own 

affairs, it elects its own presidents, and it benefits from 

membership in the World Trade Organization and in the Asia 

Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum.  In per capita GDP terms, 

Taiwan ranks just behind the European Union and ahead of 

countries such as Spain, New Zealand, and South Korea.  It 

would require ineptitude on a massive scale in Beijing, 

Washington, and Taipei for this situation to generate into a 

military conflict.  To conclude, an alarmist view of China 

exaggerates the dangers and obscures the opportunities.   

JAMES HARDING 

One minute.   

J. STAPLETON ROY 

China’s economy is now ten times larger than it was in 1978 and 

our relations with China are better.  And China has significant 

defense liabilities.  Its most modern, advanced military 

equipment comes from Russia, an unreliable source.  After years 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 15. 

 

 

 

of rapid growth, China now in defense spending, China now 

spends approximately the same percentage of GDP that we do, 

but its GDP is much smaller than ours.  Its, its defense budget is 

less than half of the combined defense budgets of the UK, France, 

Germany, and Italy, all part of the European Union with a 

common defense policy.  My experience in Asia has made me an 

optimist.  I lived in Taiwan under an authoritarian regime.  It’s 

now a thriving democracy.  I lived in Thailand twice under 

military-dominated governments, only to see it move to, for a 

period uh, to thriving parliamentary democracy.  I was in 

Indonesia when an authoritative –  

JAMES HARDING 

Stapleton Roy, I'm afraid I’m going to have to stop you there.   

J. STAPLETON ROY  

Gave way.  To sum up, the troubles produced by China booming 

are manageable, the opportunities are encouraging, the outlook 

is hopeful if we display the traditional qualities that made us a 

great country –  

JAMES HARDING 

And the speech is coming to a close.   

J. STAPLETON ROY 

Dragons are mythological –  

JAMES HARDING  

Thank you very much.  [APPLAUSE] This debate will be retitled 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 16. 

 

 

 

“Beware the Moderator.”  Um, we now turn to Michael Pillsbury  

who is going to speak for the motion.   

MICHAEL PILLSBURY 

Thank you very much.  As all of you know, here in sophisticated 

New York, State Department and Defense Department often don’t 

get along.  So it may come as a surprise to you – it certainly 

comes to a surprise to me – that I agree with every word of what 

Stapleton Roy just said.  In fact, I believe our team wants to 

adopt him as a fourth member of our team, because he 

essentially is speaking in favor of the motion uh, as we see it.  

And I want to ask for your support for the motion in the way we 

define the two key words in the motion.  The first word is 

“beware.”  And we take that to mean be wary, be wary.  The 

second key word, Bill Gertz went over eleven examples, is 

“trouble,” “spells trouble.”  In other words, the burden on the 

other team to earn your vote is to say you should not beware, you 

should be blithely sort of confident that there will be no problems 

at all with China.  They have to sustain that case.  Then they 

have to sustain the case that there will be no trouble from China, 

forever.  It seems to me it should be unanimous tonight that our 

team is going to win, especially since Stapleton Roy essentially is 

working for us.   

 

I do want to say he characterized the Defense Department’s view 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 17. 

 

 

 

of China quite correctly, that’s very accurate.  Uh, going back for 

fifteen years now, Secretaries of Defense and chairmen of the 

Joint Chiefs have said over and over and over that China is not a 

threat to the United States.  In fact, often they embellish and say 

China, for the foreseeable future, will not be a threat.  So that’s 

the public position of the Pentagon.  It’s not looking for a war, 

there’s a very high level of confidence uh, that we will prevail in 

any conflict with China.  Um and what you actually get is a series 

of factual reports each year that come out that list the eleven 

examples of trouble that Bill Gertz gave as factual matters.  But 

Mr. Roy, Ambassador Roy is correct that there’s a sense of 

confidence and not seeking any sort of conflict from China in the 

Pentagon.  There’s a sense of , that China is not a threat.  And 

frankly, I have, since we’re telling autobiographical stories, I have 

had about thirty-five years meeting with Chinese generals uh, 

from the first meet up here in the United Nations not far from 

here all the way to last week when the Delegation of Generals was 

hosted by us in the Pentagon.  Enormous changes have taken 

place but not necessarily for the, for the better.  If you go back all 

the way to the beginning of the U.S. Military relationship with the 

Chinese Communists, it’s really 1944 that we began to do some 

intelligence cooperation against the Japanese in the middle of 

World War II.  That came out of something called the Dixie 

Mission that some of you, I think in the audience, look like you 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 18. 

 

 

 

remember it.  But six years later, six years later we’re at war with 

China.  Tragic, tragic war where the Chinese to this day claimed 

they warned us.  They used this strange phrase about “we won't 

put our hands in our sleeves” and that was supposed to mean 

we’re going to send three hundred thousand troops in and 

destroy American forces.  We didn’t understand it that way.  And 

a tragic, avoidable war took place. 

 

Twenty years of containment passed, another cycle began of 

military cooperation between the U.S. and China.  Uh, our 

generals and theirs have met hundreds of times.  We in the 

eighties, under President Reagan, who certainly would yield to 

nobody in his anti-Communism, President Reagan authorized the 

sale of six American sophisticated weapon systems to China.  

Again a peak, by the end of 1944 when we were cooperating 

closely with the Chinese.  You almost couldn't have had more 

security cooperation than we did under President Reagan with 

China.  Three years later, 1989, it had to all be canceled and not 

far from here out in Bethpage, Long Island, two Chinese jet 

fighters sort of MiG23 jet fighters had to be crated up and sent 

back to China.  And we refunded part of their money because of 

the Tiananmen incident and the heart wrenching effect it had on 

American hopes for democracy and human rights in China.  Then 

in the last fifteen or sixteen years, there have been ups and 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 19. 

 

 

 

downs as Stapleton Roy correctly pointed out.  But we’ve never 

gotten a pledge from China not to use force against Taiwan.  

We’ve never settled, we’ve never really gotten credit for what 

Henry Kissinger did.  Uh, President Nixon withdrew American 

nuclear weapons from Taiwan.  President Nixon severed the 

military connection.  President Carter severed the fact that we 

kept two American generals there, one for arms supply, one to 

plan war with the Defense of Taiwan in mind.  The Chinese take 

that, those major concessions from us as though they never 

happened.  And the Chinese rhetoric today continues to talk 

about how the U.S., if it even sells one bullet to Taiwan, this 

somehow strengthens the independence forces on Taiwan.  It’s 

simply not true.  We have enormous self-imposed restrictions on 

our arms sales to Taiwan.   

 

So across the board, we have a lack of progress in Chinese 

nationalistic attitudes toward America.  If you pull out an average  

Chinese Youth Daily article today and you look up what does it 

say about the United States, it’s not very friendly.  We have 

fifteen major programs now in foreign aid, in helping their 

banking system through our Treasury Department.  Our Labor 

Department has a mediation service, going to help them with 

labor disputes.  Every department of the U.S. government has 

what, in my view amounts to an aid program, a program of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 20. 

 

 

 

engagement with China.  Very seldom mentioned in the Chinese 

press.  If you're a young Chinese, you have the impression that 

America is trying to dismember China, that America poses a 

military threat, that America’s working with India and Japan to 

somehow crush China or contain its rise.  All of this nationalistic 

rhetoric ought to be banned in the Chinese press.  We don’t say 

these things in our press, but it hasn’t stopped the worst was 

1999, I might point out, when the front page of the Communist 

Party Daily, People’s Daily, carried a long article called “The 

Seven Ways America is Worse than Nazi Germany.”  And it went 

into detail about which kind of gas the Nazis had used in their 

camps, and then there was a paragraph, I’ll never forget it, saying 

the Americans are even worse than that.   

JAMES HARDING  

One minute. 

MICHAEL PILLSBURY 

So to support our side of this debate, you have to be wary, that is 

look for possibilities that might happen in the future where 

things may not be as rosy as we may have hoped.  And you have 

to admit there’s trouble.  That’s, that’s all we, we ask for our side.  

And I hope it will be unanimous, but we don’t, we don’t have to 

be, our side doesn’t have to be extreme.  We don’t have to be 

alarmist about China, we don’t have to forecast an inevitable war.  

We don’t have to say that we should break off all relations.  I 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 21. 

 

 

 

mention to you the fifteen aid programs, I want to close my last 

sentence with just one of the most impressive, to me, we have 

more than fifty agreements, governmental agreements to transfer 

American scientific findings to China for free.  Our National 

Science Foundation, our White House Office of Science and 

Technology Policy are in charge of this—Chinese don’t really 

make a big deal out of it, but it’s an amazing program…   

JAMES HARDING  

Michael Pillsbury, I'm afraid your time is up.  

MICHAEL PILLSBURY 

Thank you.   

JAMES HARDING  

Thank you very much.  [APPLAUSE] We now turn to Daniel Rosen 

who is speaking against the motion.  

DANIEL H. ROSEN 

Thank you very much James and uh, it’s a pleasure to be here 

this evening.  I want to start by saying welcome to New York uh, 

to those supporting tonight’s proposition.  While neo-cons and 

liberals alike uh, down in the Beltway in Washington and from 

other places around the country debate the theory and these 

concepts of grand strategy to do with China, we here in New York 

have been working very, very hard of course in our many 

professions to try to understand the nature of its reform, its 

growth, and make sure that we benefit as a nation from what’s 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 22. 

 

 

 

the epic changes taking place in this country, making sure that 

we don’t gauge China against the uh, abject failures of thirty, 

forty, fifty years ago, some of which have already been cited.  But 

instead, recognize that China is not at all standing still uh, and is 

very much a work in progress.  So I for one, very much look 

forward to the chance to debate these issues here tonight, the 

notion that China’s strengthening is bad news for us, which is 

really what we’re talking about of course.   

 

China’s boom is essentially economic at its core.  So the role that 

uh, has been cast for me is to lay out three critical economic 

arguments uh, for why, whether you're a New Yorker or not, uh, 

you should be very much against the motion that we have on the 

table before us this evening.  First argument, China’s boom is 

benefiting others in a big way, not just China.  Secondly, that its 

growth is very much helping its people, not repressing them, and 

thus mitigating, in an important way, many threats that we’d 

have to deal with if China were not growing.  And thirdly, that we 

the United States together with China, have larger economic 

responsibilities of a global nature that demand our mutual 

respect and our enthusiasm, in fact, instead of confrontation with 

China over its growth and strengthening.  Which indeed is what 

uh, is what we’re, we’re here to debate.  Let me exch-, uh, explain 

each of these very briefly.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 23. 

 

 

 

 

First of all, China’s growth is benefiting the economies of rich and 

poor nations alike.  Japan, with merely forty percent of the labor 

force that the United States has, exports ten billion dollars worth 

of goods to China every month.  The United States only exports 

half that amount.  Germany, with a mere one-quarter of our labor 

force, has run a net trade surplus with China over the period 

1992 to today.  The point of this is China is not an economy that 

is closed to rich-world exports at all.  It’s very much open to 

them.  Developing nations, in Southeast Asia, in Latin America, 

in Africa, are also benefiting in a way the World Bank couldn't 

have imagined a few years ago from China’s dynamic growth.  It’s 

embracing China as a new destination for exports.  Even Taiwan, 

that’s of such concern to us all here at this table, is in fact 

enjoying a sixty-six billion dollar a year trade surplus with its 

archenemy uh, the People’s Republic of China, a trade surplus 

which has grown from fourteen to forty percent every year of this 

decade so far.  Taiwan in fact is moving away from the attitude 

behind the motion on the table this evening, away from 

confrontation and toward a working out of things in a peaceful 

manner, a deepening and integrating its economy with the 

mainland’s.  Bottom line: our fortunes here depend on what we 

do, on how we compete with China, not on what China does.  We 

should spend more time competing with Germany and Japan, in 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 24. 

 

 

 

fact, for the Chinese market, and less time blaming China for all 

of our troubles.  Of course the United States is already a major 

beneficiary of China’s economic activity.  If we cut off all trade 

with China tomorrow, we would create very few American jobs, 

we would import practically everything we import from China, but 

from other countries at a higher price, which wouldn't really 

benefit anybody in this country.  

 

Second major argument I want to make: China’s growth benefits 

its people and by doing so, mitigates profound troubles that 

would eventuate, if that were not the case.  The real threats, the 

existential threat, threats to the United States today come from 

impoverished and stagnant states writhen by discontent and 

insecurity.  North Korea, Iran, Iraq, the Middle East in general, 

stagnant economic situations in Sudan, in Venezuela, these are 

what, these are the engines that breed terrorism and nihilism 

which are the true threat and trouble we should be concerning 

ourselves with.  China could have been among those.  In fact the 

China of 1978, before the dreaded boom that we’re here to debate 

this evening, would have been one of those, by embracing our 

economic model in fact, which is what they’ve done, they’ve 

grown beyond that danger.  And though eight hundred million 

Chinese are still poor by our standards, they’re striving toward 

prosperity and not toward extremism.  Those people, those toiling 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 25. 

 

 

 

Chinese are the boom that we’re here to pass judgment on this 

evening.  And while their toil brings competitive challenges for us, 

we would be gravely mistaken to try to turn back the clock to the 

failed state China was before this boom began.  Prosperity is not 

an alternative to political change in China.  In fact, it’s been the 

handmaiden of it.  The totalitarian government ruling two 

hundred dollar per capita China in 1978 bears practically no 

resemblance to the Chinese government managing a two 

thousand dollar per capita economy today.  Likewise, the Chinese 

government that runs ten thousand dollar per capita China 

tomorrow will be vastly different than the one we deal with today.   

 

Third major argument: beyond our narrow economic interests – 

and theirs – lie global economic responsibilities that must be 

addressed cooperatively.  Tonight we’re debating whether the 

benefits of a stronger China are worth the trouble it brings us 

along the way, or rather, whether the troubles of a stagnant 

China would suit our interests better, because that’s really the 

question.  It’s which set of troubles suits the American interest 

and which does not?  It’s a reasonable question, but such a 

narrow-minded calculus of self-interest alone does not befit a 

great power and certainly does not befit the United States.  

Economic success, foremost ours and now China’s as well, is 

creating a great economic, political, and indeed security 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 26. 

 

 

 

challenge, climate change and an environmental crisis globally.  

The U.S. has refused to address its responsibility to carbon, on 

carbon emissions.  And the reason given: China.  A con-

convenient fits-all-purposes ex-excuse not to act when you don’t 

want to act.  China, interestingly enough, has refused to exact 

uh, except carbon commitments for the same reason.  

JAMES HARDING  

One minute. 

DANIEL H. ROSEN 

The United States should go first.  This log jam is fueled by the 

mistrust that tonight’s motion puts forward, and indeed it cannot 

be permitted to stand.  We have an economic responsibility to the 

planet to deal with this together or we’re going to lose more than 

anybody does.  To finish, let me say this, I have a private practice 

in addition to being a think tanker and professor.  And my 

customers are troubles.  They’re troubles I’d like to have more of, 

frankly.  I don't have a problem with troubles, we have more 

troubles with Canada economically than we do with any other 

country.  Is that bad news for the United States?  It’s not, it’s part 

of a mature relationship.  Those in favor of tonight’s motion 

counsel a strategy meant to leave China in ruins using a play 

book last used in the Cold War, building up our military instead 

of our economy.  Who will join us in such a strategy?  I urge you 

to vote against tonight’s motion.  The troubles of a stagnant, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 27. 

 

 

 

unbooming China –  

JAMES HARDING  

Daniel Rosen, your time is up.   

DANIEL H. ROSEN 

Far, far outweigh –  

JAMES HARDING  

Your time is up. 

DANIEL H. ROSEN 

The challenges of its growth.  Thank you.  [APPLAU.S.E] 

JAMES HARDING  

Thank you.  Now I turn to John Mearsheimer, the last speaker 

uh, for the motion, “Beware the Dragon: A booming China spells 

trouble for America.”   

JOHN J. MEARSHEIMER 

The question on the table is does a rising China spell trouble for 

the United States.  Or in slightly different words from an 

American perspective, is a powerful China likely to be bad for the 

United States?  I think the answer is axiomatically yes.  And I say 

this not because I feel any personal hostility towards the Chinese, 

which I certainly don’t, or because I think China is particularly 

aggressive because it was or is a Communist country or it is run 

in an authoritarian political form.  I think that matters very little 

and I don't say it because I think China’s likely to behave 

irrationally in the future.  My argument is that the best situation 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 28. 

 

 

 

for the United States from the perspective of maximizing its 

security is to be the most powerful state in the international 

system.  The bigger the gap between you and everybody else, the 

more secure you are.  To put it in Pentagonese, you don’t want a 

peer competitor in your national system.   

 

To give you two examples that highlight this point, think about 

the United States and its two immediate neighbors, Canada and 

Mexico.  As you know, we are much more powerful than either 

one of those countries.  None of you go to bed at night worrying 

about Canada or Mexico attacking the United States tomorrow, 

next week, or next year.  That’s simply not going to happen 

because we’re so powerful.  Would you trade the present 

situation for one where Canada and Mexico or Canada or Mexico 

was twice as powerful as the United States?  Of course you 

wouldn't, it’s much better to have a situation where we’re the 

most powerful state in the Western hemisphere.  Same basic logic 

applies to China.  If China has two choices, one it can have a 

Japan in Asia that’s five times more powerful than China, or a 

situation where China is five more, five times more powerful than 

Japan.  Which one of those alternatives do you think the Chinese 

will choose?  It’s an open-and-shut case.  They’d much prefer to 

be five times more powerful.  And the same basic argument 

applies to the United States and China.  Today, tomorrow, or at 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 29. 

 

 

 

any point in time.  If you have a choice of being as powerful or 

less powerful than China, or being more powerful, which would 

you choose if you're interested in maximizing your security?  An 

open and shut case. 

 

Let me spell out the logic that underpins my argument.  Principal 

goal of any state in the international system, it’s not the only 

goal, but the principal goal is survival.  And the reason is, if you 

don’t survive, you can’t pursue any other goals.  The problem 

that states have is they operate in an anarchic system.  That’s 

political science speak for saying that they operate in a system 

where there’s no higher authority that you can turn to if you get 

into trouble.  [In other words, if you dial 911 in a crisis in 

international politics, there’s nobody at the other end.  In a 

system like that, where you're dealing with other states whose 

intentions you can never be certain of, and you want to 

understand here that it’s impossible for the United States to 

discern what Chinese intentions will be ten years from now, 

twenty years from now, thirty years from now.  We don’t know 

what those intentions will be.  In a system where you can’t 

discern intentions, and where there is no higher authority that 

you can turn to when you're in trouble, the best way to maximize 

your chances of surviving is to make sure that you are by far the 

most powerful sys-, state in the international system.  To put it in 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 30. 

 

 

 

colloquial terms, you want to be the biggest and baddest dude on 

the block, so that nobody fools around with you.  To put it in 

political science speak, you want to be a hegemony.   

 

Now the question is, what does the system look like today?  

Situation today from an American point of view is ideal.  We’re by 

far the most powerful state on earth.  We dominate the Western 

hemisphere.  There’s no state in our uh, region of the world that 

could possibly challenge us.  We have tremendous power 

projection capabilities, which is why we’re called the only 

superpower in the world.  And in Asia and in Europe, the two 

areas of the world where there are other great powers or potential 

great powers, we have no peer competitor.  There’s no imperial 

Japan, there’s no imperial Germany, there’s no Nazi Germany, 

and there’s no Soviet Union.  From an American point of view, 

that’s a wonderful situation.  Now, what is the future going to 

look like if in say, twenty years, China continues to grow 

economically the way it has grown over the last twenty years?  

What you're going to get is a country that’s economically pretty 

close to being as strong as the United States, and you could rest 

assured that China’s going to turn that economic might into 

military might.  They’d be foolish if they didn’t.  You’ll then have a 

country that’s roughly uh, the military equivalent of the United 

States, or at least close to it.  That country is going to try to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 31. 

 

 

 

dominate Asia the way the United States has successfully 

dominated the western hemisphere.  They’d be fools to do 

otherwise.  Do you think the founding fathers and their 

successors in this country were fools because they had attempted 

to establish, and did establish a Germany in the Western 

hemisphere?  Of course not.  They did it for good security 

reasons.  The Asians will do the same, the Chinese will do the 

same thing in Asia.  We have a Monroe Doctrine here in the 

United States.  Most of you know it very well.  We basically tell 

the European and Asian great powers that they have to stay out 

of our hemisphere.  We don’t want them here.  Don’t you think 

the Chinese are going to feel the same way in Asia when they’re 

powerful enough to think about dominating Asia?  Furthermore, 

they’re going to dominate, develop significant power projection 

capability just like we have developed power projection capability.  

They’re going to develop a blue water navy and that navy is going 

to be designed to go into the Middle East, much the way our navy 

is designed to go in the Middle East.  When I was a young boy, 

my mother used to say what’s good for the goose is good for the 

gander.  If it’s good for the United States, why don’t you think it’ll 

be good for China to try and dominate Asia and to try and 

develop significant power projection capability?   

 

Of course this all raises the question then, how is the United 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 32. 

 

 

 

States likely to react?  It’s very simple.  We have a clear record 

here of how we’ll react when other countries try to dominate 

either Europe or Asia.  We go to great lengths to stop them.  

Imperial Germany, imperial Japan, Nazi Germany, and the 

former Soviet Union, they’re all on the scrap heap of history.  And 

we played a key role in putting them there.  The United States 

will not tolerate a situation where China tries to dominate Asia.  

And as I said, China will try to dominate Asia just the way the 

United States has tried to dominate and has succeeded at 

dominating the Western hemisphere.  What is my bottom line 

here?  My bottom line is straightforward.  The present situation is 

better for the United States and more stable than a world –  

JAMES HARDING  

One minute.  

JOHN J. MEARSHEIMER 

In which China is as powerful or almost as powerful as the 

United States.  In other words, if China rises, trouble is in store 

for the United States.  Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  

JAMES HARDING  

John Mearsheimer, thank you very much.  And now finally, Jim 

McGregor speaking against the motion. 

JAMES MCGREGOR 

Well I, my name is Jim McGregor and I’ve lived in China for 

twenty years.  And I'm just grateful that I did not make Bill 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 33. 

 

 

 

Gertz’s list of eleven threats from China.  [LAUGHTER]  Um it’s 

kind of intimidating being here among all these Ph.D.s and well 

studied men.  I ended up in China because I was expelled from 

high school.  Um, I joined the army when I got expelled from high 

school, they sent me to Vietnam, that turned my head towards 

Asia, led to me becoming a journalist.  And as time went on, I 

wanted to get back to Asia as a journalist, so I went to China in 

’85 and backpacked through the country.  Um, ’87, I moved to 

Taiwan to learn Mandarin and I’ve lived in Beijing since ’90, both 

as a journalist and a businessperson.  All of the theories that I’ve 

heard tonight, I’ve read many times.  My view is more kind of 

grass roots what China looks like on the ground and what I’ve 

seen.  Um, when I first moved to China as a reporter, I had secret 

police following, my phone was tapped.  Even the maid who took 

care of our nanny who helped us with our daughter was from the 

foreign ministry and made reports on us.  Um and this was a 

country that was just really emerging from the forest fire of the 

Cultural Revolution.  And what I’ve seen since then has been 

kind of documented by other speakers here tonight on the fast 

growth.   

 

I’ve watched, the first uh, financial person I met in China was a 

guy named Milen Xiong [PH] who was a, a steel worker who had 

cornered the market on the four stocks on the illegal Shanghai 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 34. 

 

 

 

stock market.  Um and now China’s um, doing the world’s largest 

IPOs and in fact Chinese stocks were the top performers on 

NASDAQ last year.  When I first got to Beijing in the fall, you had 

big piles of cabbage on the corner because that was the only 

vegetable they got.  People would bring it home, they’d shove it 

under their bed or in their cabinets and over the winter, you’d 

tear away the rotten leaves and you could eat the fresh leaves 

inside.  Well as you know, now, if I don’t see a new high rise 

everyday, I get a little jittery, it’s moving so fast.  Um 

international sophistication, when I went there in ’85, people 

would come up to me on the street and show me around for the 

day because they were so excited to learn about the outside 

world.  While we’ve had six hundred thousand students alone 

from China come to the United States, Chinese people are very 

international, traveling the world, doing business um, and even 

being involved in uh, academic uh, endeavors in the United 

States.  

 

So we’ve learned that China’s a very formidable country tonight 

and we better be scared of them um, because why?  Well China 

has grown very fast and it’s moving very fast, but what has 

happened during this period?  China has been shoving all kinds 

of problems under the carpet.  The carpet’s getting lumpy and the 

country will trip on these problems and it’s going to be very busy 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 35. 

 

 

 

for the new few decades fixing this.  Environment, China is trash.  

Sixteen of the twenty worst air-polluted cities in the world are in 

China.  I’ve traveled every province of China and I’ve never seen a 

clean body of water that was not in a bottle.  Um, healthcare, 

from a fairly decent healthcare system has become very 

commercial.  Two-thirds of people don’t have healthcare.  If 

you're a peasant and your kid gets cancer, what do you do?  You 

beg, borrow, and steal money to get them to a hospital in a city.  

Uh, you have to deposit the money for your kid to be in that 

hospital.  If you run out of money, they kick your kid out of that 

hospital. Um the have and the have-not issue is growing and 

growing.  There was eighty thousand demonstrations two years 

ago.  Last year they went down because they realized they better 

not be reporting on how many they had.  Um and on and on 

party corruption, etcetera.  So this is this uh, colossus that’s 

going to take on the United States.  

 

What does China really want?  From a military standpoint, China 

wants to protect its wealth.  It’s been a country that’s been 

colonized.  It also wants to have the military projection to be able 

to protect it, protect its own sea lanes.  Um from natural 

resources, China, the rocks have not been kind to China.  They’re 

as dependent as we are or more on imported oil and other mat-, 

in iron ore and other raw materials.  Um the government.  The 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 36. 

 

 

 

government is running scared of its own people.  You’ve got to 

realize when you have ten, ten, ten percent economic growth for 

twenty years and kids are growing up under that kind of growth, 

they expect exponential improvement every year forever.  And the 

government has really no credibility other than economic growth 

and giving people a better life.   

 

So where does the United States have to worry?  Where do we 

really eclipse China?  You can’t be a global leader without a 

leading ideology and China right now has no leading ideology 

other than getting rich.  Uh, right now the United States isn’t so 

popular around the world uh, with Iraq and other issues.  China 

is out working the world, but I’ll tell you, people are looking for 

U.S. leadership.  We will not have trouble competing with China 

diplomatically.  Financial world.  New York um, you can walk 

down the street here and throw a rock in any direction, you're 

going to hit a trillion dollars in hedge funds.  Um the Shanghai 

Bank still don’t have check-clearing mechanisms for private 

accounts.  China’s moving ahead in, in the financial world.  

They’ve got a trillion dollar foreign exchange surplus and they’re 

in fact putting together a hundred twenty billion dollar hedge 

fund.  But they are going to have to dependent on the U.S. and 

our financial system and cooperating with us for their money to 

be deployed well as well as the capital they need.  Education.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 37. 

 

 

 

China’s built seven hundred universities in the last fifteen years.  

However, it still has stuffed ducks-style education where people 

are taught to memorize, not to think for themselves and not to 

analyze.  The world, the world comes to America as long as we 

give them the visas  to have the best in the world education 

system.  We can absorb the brains of the world and stay ahead of 

anybody in the world.   

 

Um finally, I'm looking at my opponents here.  I'm on the good 

guys team here on the left and uh, my opponents here, these are 

all learned men, they’re all PhDs.  But take a look, there’s not a 

bit of suntan on any of those heads.  Um they have, they have 

been sitting in offices in Washington and Chicago um, reading 

reports and putting together the world under, under theories.  

And that’s quite good, I'm happy to say that.  And I'm not here, 

I'm not here to defend China.  I'm here to defend America 

because um, if you say that we can’t handle the rise of China um, 

then you're voting against America tonight.  I believe that you 

really have to vote no because if you vote yes, then you're voting 

against America.  America can handle the rise of China.  China’s 

got a lot of problems.  And we’re going to, we’ve, we’ve handled 

many things in, in the life of this country.  And we will handle 

this quite well.  Thank you very much.  [APPLAUSE]  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 38. 

 

 

 

JAMES HARDING  

Jim McGregor, thank you very much.  Now uh, before we turn to 

the uh, Q&A uh, part of the evening, I just wanted to let you 

know how you all voted um, before the uh, debate began.  Um, 

before the debate, and I’ll just remind you, the motion is, “Beware 

the Dragon: A booming China spells trouble for America.”  Before 

the debate began, you voted 41.05 percent of you, 41 percent of 

you voted for the motion, 37.4 percent voted against the motion, 

and 21.5 percent said you were undecided.  So quite a thin 

margin for the sun-drenched team against the motion to sway 

them.  Before we get started, I thought I’d abuse my position as a 

moderator here to just ask a couple of questions.  And I guess I 

uh, wanted to start by um, directing a question at John 

Mearsheimer.  Um you couldn't help but feel, feel that Michael 

Pillsbury gave the game away a little bit when he said, you know, 

on our side of the motion, we don’t need to be alarmist, we don’t 

need to talk about war.  And yet, within a few minutes’ time, you 

were saying, the U.S. will not tolerate a situation where China 

tries to dominate Asia.  And I guess my question is, to you, how 

does China have a hope of fulfilling its promise of a peaceful rise 

if people like you are standing up and saying we will not tolerate 

China that seeks to dominate the region in which it lives?  Is this 

not just warmongering that is dressed as prudence?  And uh, I 

have a question I uh, also – [LAUGHTER].  I, I have a question 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 39. 

 

 

 

uh, out to Stapleton Roy um, which is listening to you, you can’t 

help but fear that, that your position is, is don’t worry be happy.  

Uh, we have a politically unstable superpower with a foreign 

policy that is unclear even to itself.  And clearly that is going to, 

at the very least, threaten U.S. preeminence in the world.  And I 

guess my question to you is looking back over the last thirty 

years, even if you take into account the benefits of engagement, 

has not commercial engagement with China made it more 

difficult for the U.S. to engage on issues from Tibet to Taiwan?  

And how much will the U.S. be forced to compromise its foreign 

policy positions in, if it’s going to ignore the threat that China 

poses?  So first to address, Mearsheimer.   

JOHN J. MEARSHEIMER 

Uh, the question of whether or not China can rise peacefully is a 

somewhat different question than the one that is on the table, 

and there’s no question, as our moderator said, that I’ve bumped 

into the question of whether China can rise peacefully.  Now he 

said in effect, aren’t I creating a self-fulfilling prophecy here, 

because China wants to rise peacefully in the story uh, but yet 

the United States, because it’s being prudent, is creating a 

situation where you’ll have a clash down the road.  It’s not uh, 

necessarily that you’ll have a shooting war.  But you’ll certainly 

have an intense security competition as a result of my story.  

There’s no question about that with the possibility of the war.  My 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 40. 

 

 

 

argument is that the United States really has no choice.  Because 

as China gets more and more powerful economically, the United 

States constantly bumps into the question of what China’s 

intentions will be ten, twenty, or thirty years down the road.  And 

he says, the moderator, that China wants to rise peacefully.  But 

he can’t assure me that China wants to rise peacefully or will rise 

peacefully.  There’s just no way of knowing.  And in a world 

where you have a state that’s becoming increasingly powerful, 

nearly as powerful as you, you have to assume worst case about 

its intentions to protect yourself in case there is trouble.  

Because as I said to you before, if you do get into trouble, there’s 

no 911 that you can appeal to.  And in a very important way, it is 

a self-fulfilling prophecy, and this is why I titled the book that I 

wrote on this subject, the tragedy of great-power politics.  This is 

a tragic situation.  The United States simply has no choice but to 

assume the worst about China and the end result is that you’ll 

get that for sure.  [LAUGHTER] 

JAMES HARDING  

And on that happy note, Stapleton Roy.  

J. STAPLETON ROY 

I spent my career as a diplomat and somehow the world wasn’t 

this Hobbesian picture that has been presented to us.  Just think 

about it for a moment.  If your goal is to keep everybody else 

down, you shouldn't be surprised to discover that nobody else 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 41. 

 

 

 

shares that goal.  Now successful foreign policies are based on 

finding common interests with other countries, not in trying to 

keep them down. If we try to keep China down, we’ll have to keep 

India down or whoever the next person is.  What kind of a foreign 

policy and kind of a country are, are we if that’s our approach?  

Think of it in another way.  If our goal is to ensure the security 

and prosperity of the American people, in a world in which other 

countries have an equal right, if they can do so responsibly, to 

improve the prosperity and security of their people, then we have 

a world in which there are common goals, and which other 

countries can also raise the living standards of their people and 

meet their security needs better.  The goal then of our foreign 

policy is responsible behavior in the international community.  

That’s a shared goal with most other countries and it’s an 

achievable goal.  But it requires that we also set a good example.  

Now remember also the Western hemisphere is the only region of 

the world in which one power can be the hegemony.  China is 

surrounded by Japan that has a conventional military capable, 

that’s equal to China’s.  It’s surrounded by Russia, a nuclear 

power, by India, a nuclear power.  By Vietnam which is no patsy, 

by Korea which is no patsy, and the United States is a permanent 

factor in the region.  Chinese leaders do not spend their time 

thinking about dominating Asia through power.  The way that 

they are increasing our influence is through influence.  They’re 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 42. 

 

 

 

reassuring their neighbors.  They’re behaving in a way which 

leaves the Southeast Asian countries in the lead in promoting an 

East Asian community, not China.  So it’s the country that 

throws its weight around that loses influence.  And the country 

that uses its influence to promote its interest that is doing so 

more effectively.  We ought to learn something from this.  We are 

actually very good at playing this game when we realize that we 

cannot accomplish our goals or keep a peaceful world if we rely 

on power as opposed to the right balance of power and influence.  

We certainly need to keep ourselves strong enough so a rising 

China does not threaten our prosperity and our security.  But we 

don’t need to do so in a world where we have to keep everybody 

else down because of a threat to our hegemonic position.  

JAMES HARDING 

Thank you.   

MICHAEL PILLSBURY 

May I, may I just say I still consider Ambassador Roy to be the 

fourth member of our team.  Thank you, thank you very much for 

those comments.  A balance of power is in fact the right 

approach.  

JAMES HARDING  

Michael Pillsbury is uh, is being a dissident.  Uh, within the 

process, we uh, you know, need to keep the lines of the left and 

right absolutely clear here.  Now we get to the interesting bit 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 43. 

 

 

 

which is uh, over to you.  Uh, what I’d like to do is uh, ask you to 

um, uh, you know, come forth with questions for the panel.  

Please make clear who you're directing them to.  Please, if you 

wouldn't mind, stand up when you ask a question.  Um if you're 

a member of the press, would you say so?  And would you 

identify yourself.  And one final thing, would you do what I didn’t, 

which is keep your questions short and succinct.   Right, there 

are two people here.  There are people with mics, two up, two up 

at the front here.  Thanks very much.   This lady right in the 

middle.  

FEMALE QUESTIONER  

Um, hi, and my name is Lily [UNCLEAR], um, for John 

Mearsheimer.  Uh, you say that we should want to maintain 

superiority to China, but just as the part of the fabric of America, 

shouldn’t we also want to concern ourselves with the human 

rights and the, uh, conditions in China?  

JOHN MEARSHEIMER 

My…  

JAMES HARDING 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES] Actually, uh, John Mearsheimer, if you 

don’t mind, we’re going to take a couple of questions, two or three 

together, and then we’re going to go on.  Thank you very much.  

So there’s a gentleman over here who has a question.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 44. 

 

 

 

MALE QUESTIONER  

Uh, yeah, my name is Mike Endacott [PH], um, this question is 

for Daniel Rosen.  Um, does the example of Hong Kong, and uh, 

China’s before towards Hong Kong give us any clear picture of 

their future intentions?  

JAMES HARDING 

Thank you very much.  Let’s start with those two, John 

Mearsheimer, should we not pay more attention to human rights 

than just our own interests?  

JOHN MEARSHEIMER  

The point that I tried to make in my comments was that the state 

can have a variety of different interests, and promoting human 

rights, or protecting human rights and promoting democracy can 

be, and often are legitimate goals of states, especially the United 

States.   But the highest goal always has to be, uh, protecting 

your security, maintaining your survival.  And the point that I 

tried to make clear here is that the best way to maximize your 

chances of surviving in the system are to make sure that you are 

by far the most powerful state, because then nobody can fool 

around with you.  And once you have ensured your survival, you 

are of course then free to pursue those other goals.   

JAMES HARDING 

Thank you.  Daniel Rosen, what does Hong Kong tell us?  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 45. 

 

 

 

DANIEL ROSEN 

Hong Kong tells us a lot.  Uh, the, the motion we’re debating 

tonight, with regard to the meta-phenomenon of China’s 

strengthening, uh, and coming back into a position, uh, of 

relative strength after a century of relative weakness could easily 

have been debated in the more narrow context of Hong Kong ten 

years ago.  About ten years ago today, in fact, uh, almost.  Uh, or, 

or a month away.  Uh, people assuming that China’s 

reassumption of control over Hong Kong would necessarily bring, 

uh, a cauldron of concerns and troubles about Hong Kong’s fate.  

[01:08:13:02]  In fact, uh, things have played out entirely 

differently than that.  Uh, China has left Hong Kong to manage 

its own affairs, in the same way at Beijing, to a great extent, is 

allowing many regions of the country within mainland China to 

manage their own affairs.  Probably too much so.  We probably 

need a stronger Beijing rather than a weaker one, in fact.  Uh, 

Hong Kong is prospering.  Its success or failure stands on its own 

competitiveness.  This is precisely what we should learn form the 

situation.  Hong Kong can do better or worse, it has less to do 

with Beijing than it does to do with Hong Kong.  The United 

States can benefit or be at a relative loss as a result of China’s 

economic growth.  It has everything to do with the choices we 

make, and how we choose to respond, instead of trying to adjust 

our game to respond to what China wants to do instead.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 46. 

 

 

 

JAMES HARDING 

Thank you very much.  Right, yeah, the two gentleman, just up, 

uh, then let’s take a couple of, uh, questions from you two 

please.  Uh, and then, uh, I saw there’s someone right up at the 

back.  Thank you.  

MALE QUESTIONER 

Thank you.  My name is Gerry Ohrstrom [PH].  Given Frederic 

Bastiat’s empirically proven statement where goods cross 

borders, armies won’t, I’d like to ask the friendly Mr. Pillsbury if 

he truly believes that a wealthy China poses a greater threat to 

America and to the world and to the region than an impoverished 

China.   Others, I think Mr. Hilsh-, Mearsheimer clearly an-, 

answered that question.  I’d like to get your direct answer.  

JAMES HARDING  

Thank you very much.  So the gentleman in the back.  

MALE QUESTIONER 

Hi.  Uh, I guess this is for Mr. Mearsheimer.  He was saying that 

the, the uh, military strength is the key to controlling China, but 

it seems that we can’t really do anything in Iraq to control Iraq.  

How are we ever gonna control China?   And really, economically, 

since they have trillions of dollars pouring into their country, and 

we’re running a major, major deficit, how would we ever possibly 

finance a military that could overcome China?   I mean, they have 

so much more money in the bank now, and it seems like in the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 47. 

 

 

 

foreseeable future, that’s going to be the case.  So shouldn’t we 

focus on being economic partners with them and trading partners 

as Ambassador Roy said, and seek common ground rather than 

sort of pursue this military concept, which isn’t working 

anywhere for us?  

JAMES HARDING 

Thank you.  And the gentleman here in the bow tie please.  

MALE QUESTIONER 

Uh, my question also is to Mr. Mearsheimer. [BACKGROUND 

LAUGHTER]  Um, so-, sorry to pile on you, but um, why do you 

believe contrary to, uh, every example in recorded history that 

the United States can continue, uh, to be the most powerful 

nation in the world?   And in what way are the citizens of those 

countries which used to be the most powerful nations in the 

world, Sweden, the Netherlands, Great Britain, uh, any worser 

[(sic)] off now that they are no longer citizens of the most powerful 

nation in the world?  

JAMES HARDING 

Thank you for that very understanding question.  Uh [LAUGHS] 

[BACKGROUND LAUGHTER], let, let’s um, let’s start first, uh, 

though with the question, uh, for Michael Pillsbury about a, a 

wealthy China surely being better for America and the world than 

an impoverished one.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 48. 

 

 

 

MICHAEL PILLSBURY 

Uh, I prefer a wealthy China to a poor, angry China.  Uh, I think 

the, the issue though…  

PANELIST 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES] I think Michael just joined our side.  

[BACKGROUND LAUGHTER] 

PANELIST 2  

 [OVERLAPPING VOICES] It’s about time.  

PANELIST  

 [OVERLAPPING VOICES] It’s an even trade. [BACKGROUND 

LAUGHTER] [APPLAUSE]    

PANELIST 2  

State Department’s always thinking the allies.  [BACKGROUND 

LAUGHTER] 

MICHAEL PILLSBURY  

I think the issue is really democracy, and a wealthy democratic 

China is a better partner for us, a better ally, a better friend than 

a poor, than even a poor democratic China.  The problem is how 

to get from here to there without being foolishly naïve in building 

up China’s economic strength in a way that they also maintain 

their nationalism.  They maintain their anti-American views, and 

they, uh, it ends, the situation ends up that we have been gullible 

and naïve over a fifteen or twenty year period.  And this has 

happened before.   If you read John Mearsheimer’s most recent 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 49. 

 

 

 

book, it really chronicles a number of times this has happened in 

world politics.  So if you really want to support our side of the 

resolution, you need to be thinking about this phrase the 

moderator used, which I love, I think he’s working for us too, 

“Don’t worry, Be Happy.”   Because that’s what their side really is 

advocating.  What I am saying, be wary in the following four or 

five ways.  We need to continue our military exchange program 

with the Chinese military, and let them see that we’re not their 

enemy.  We don’t want to call that off because “don’t worry be 

happy.”  We need to continue the embargo on arms sales to 

China.  We shouldn’t sell weapons to China.  We should continue 

the Eur-, our support that the European Union has its embargo 

on arms sales to China, until human rights improves 

significantly.  We should continue to do something about 

Taiwan’s defense.  We don’t have to arm them to the teeth, but 

we shouldn’t just walk away from Taiwan.  And finally, we need 

to have technology limits on our most advanced technology that 

we transfer to China.  Right now, it’s very generous, but there are 

a few things we hold back, and some people say that was part of 

their successful test against the satellite in space, is that they 

had some western technology, uh, at their, at their service.  And 

frankly, I don’t know if all of you know as, perhaps as civilians, 

ninety percent of your military forces go through satellites.  

Communications, intelligence, also and every time you use an 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 50. 

 

 

 

ATM card, that’s a satellite conveyed transaction.   So we are a 

highly vulnerable society with our four hundred satellites in 

space.  This test is very serious in January, and the Chinese 

government after repeated requests has no explanation for it.   

They just say, “Oh, don’t worry about it.  Don’t worry, be happy.”  

[BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]   

JAMES HARDING 

Thank you very much…  

DANIEL ROSEN 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES] …let me see if there’s….  

JAMES HARDING 

…We’ll come back in one moment.  Just to John Mearsheimer, 

could you take on both of those questions, essentially the 

question of whether or not American hegemony should or can 

afford to continue forever?  

JOHN MEARSHEIMER 

Yeah.  You, you wanna let Daniel…  

JAMES HARDING  

No, no, go ahead, John Mearsheimer, and then we’ll turn to 

Daniel Rosen in a moment.  

JOHN MEARSHEIMER  

Oh, very quickly, on all three questions.  The first one said where 

goods cross borders, armies don’t.  Uh, I think that’s empirically 

wrong, and there was a tremendous amount of economic 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 51. 

 

 

 

interdependence in Europe before World War I, uh, and World 

War I still happened.  And if you look at German-Soviet relations 

in 1941, there was actually a tremendous amount of economic 

intercourse, and yet you still had, uh, World War II.  And during 

the Cold War, in fact, you had hardly any economic intercourse 

between the United States and the Soviet Union, and 

nevertheless you never had a shooting war.  Now on the question 

of whether or not we could possibly contain China, uh, which 

gets into two other questions that I was asked, uh, and the 

person pointed out, how could we possibly contain China when 

we can’t even deal with Iraq?   Uh, I would vote that going to war 

in Iraq was a completely crazy idea from the beginning, and 

whether or not you can [APPLAUSE] fight the war in Iraq is a very 

different issue than whether you can contain China down the 

road.  And the analogy I would point to that makes this quite 

obvious is our experience in Vietnam, and at the same time our 

experience containing and defeating the Soviet Union during the 

Cold War.  The Vietnam War, like the Iraq War was a completely 

cockamamie idea.  Uh, but nevertheless, the United States, even 

though it lost in Vietnam still won the Cold War.  Uh, and there 

no question that the United States should avoid, should avoid 

fighting Iraqs down the road.   But it clearly has the wherewithal, 

uh, to uh, finance the defenses to, to contain China down the 

road.  And this gets to the final question, which is, can the United 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 52. 

 

 

 

States remain number one forever, and if we don’t, we’ll be, will 

we be that badly off?  Uh, first of all, nothing is forever, so the 

United States is not going to remain number one forever.  But I 

would be willing to bet a lot of money that the United States is 

actually more powerful relative to the rest of the world over the 

course of this century, largely for demographic reasons, uh, than 

it is right now.  Uh, a lot of the doomsayers, who say that the 

United States is in real trouble down the road are simply wrong, 

in my opinion.  And I think a powerful case can be made contrary 

to what we’re talking about up here that China won’t rise, uh, 

anywhere near as much as many people think it will.  And getting 

into the final points, are we worse off, or we will be worse off not 

being so powerful?  Look at the Europeans.  Well, if you look at 

Europe in recent times, that’s true.  But let’s go back to 1900 and 

think about being a Pole anywhere from 1900 to 2007.  Think 

about growing up in France anytime between 1900 and 2007.  

Yeah, the last few decades have been pretty good, uh, but if you 

look at the broader sweep of history, it looks mighty nasty.   And 

who’s to tell what the future looks like, many of you assume that 

it’s gonna be peace, love and [UNCLEAR] forever, right, I mean 

Europe has been pacified, war has been burned out of Europe.  

Maybe, maybe not.  I’m just a very prudent person.  I don’t like to 

take chances.  And that means that I just prefer to be much more 

powerful rather than [BACKGROUND LAUGHTER] as powerful as 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 53. 

 

 

 

the other states in the system.   

JAMES HARDING  

Right [APPLAUSE] thank you very much, John Mearsheimer.  A 

very quick response from Daniel Rosen.  

DANIEL ROSEN 

This is gonna start to sound like a George Bernard Shaw play, 

but I’m with Pillsbury. [BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]  Uh, a, a 

wealthy democratic China is clearly in the U.S. interest.  Be wary 

of arguments that you can foster democracy in China by 

stymieing the boom.    A boom doesn’t guarantee 

democratization.  A bust guarantees that you will not get there.  

That can be said pretty clearly.  And we already see early 

evidence of democratization processes starting to take place.  

People elect their own co-op boards.  They decide who represents 

them in their parent-teacher associations in their schools.  This 

is happening already.  And everybody who’s been stymieing 

China sees it manifested.  

JAMES HARDING  

Thank you very much.  Right, a few more questions.  And, uh, I 

don’t want this New York audience to get a bad reputation, so if 

anyone wants to throw a punch at the side that’s against the 

motion, please feel free.  The gentleman here on the left.  

MALE QUESTIONER 

I’ll see what I can do.  Um, uh, if we held this debate, uh, twenty 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 54. 

 

 

 

years ago, you’d probably insert Japan for China.  Uh, at that 

time, and, and we see that that kind of played out a different 

way, despite what Michael Crichton might think.  Um, that said, 

how does Japan kind of enter into the debate here?  I mean, if 

you think about it, um, there is some, uh, scholarship or some 

theory that suggests that we should think about Japan as a 

bulwark against a rising China, and I’d like to get fielder’s choice 

from the panelists, what, how do they think Japan, um, plays in, 

you know, in terms of the constitution, in terms of rearmament.  

How can they pl-, play a constructive role in perhaps bringing 

some coma-, accommodation in Asia?  

JAMES HARDING  

Thank you very much.  And, uh, the gentleman up there in the 

blue shirt?  

MALE QUESTIONER 

Thanks.  This is for the speakers against the motion.  Um, you 

had said that China has no ideology, and yet if a booming China 

means that U.S. is increasingly dependant on China, and yet 

China has shown it’s ab-, um, it’s interest in supporting rogue or 

failed states, such as Sudan.  And yet because of our dependence 

on China we’re-, that inhibits our ability to intervene in those 

situations, how would you respond to that?  

JAMES HARDING  

Thank you very much.  Let’s uh, we’ll come to you in one 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 55. 

 

 

 

moment.  Uh, let’s start, Jim McGregor, do you want to deal with 

uh, Japan?  And who’d like to deal with uh, China’s role in 

Sudan?  Let’s start with Japan. [BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]   

JAMES MCGREGOR 

Well no, I, I wanna address where he talks about us being 

dependant on China.  Who’s dependant on whom here?  Look at 

the eco-, I mean, no one’s talking about the Chinese people and 

the economic times.  China’s oil companies, China’s banks, 

China’s telecom companies are all listed on overseas stock 

exchanges.   They’re, they’re, they were the second biggest buyers 

of U.S. treasuries.  They’re completely tied into us, we’re not, 

we’re not dependant on China in any, in any way shape or form.  

We’re tied together, which is for the common good.   A country 

that is tied together that deeply and economically and we’re, and 

the, the amount of jobs that are created by the consumers in 

America, by the foreign companies, sixty-some percent of exports 

from China come from foreign companies.  So we’re so 

intertwined, uh, it, it just brings more stability.  

JAMES HARDING 

But Jim McGregor, doesn’t this question cut to exactly that 

problem?  We’re having two debates here this evening.  On the 

right hand side, you have people who are talking about foreign 

policy and national security.  And on the left hand side, we have 

people talking about economic growth and commercial 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 56. 

 

 

 

opportunity.   And actually when you, when it, you come to it, 

when you look at a case like Sudan, when you look at China’s 

involvement in Zimbabwe, actually we’re failing to address or 

engage China in constructive diplomatic, uh, you know, work 

around the world.  

JAMES MCGREGOR 

Well if you look at, what have we done?  China now is awash with 

money, and they’re looking to invest overseas.  When they came 

to buy Unocal, uh, which pumped I think point eight percent of 

American oil, Congress looked at this at a national security threat 

and pushed them away.  [01:21:52:08]  And we’ve pushed Middle 

East out of Chin-, out of the U.S. already, they’re going to China.  

China’s now going out in the world to invest and we’re starting to 

push them away.  This isn’t, this isn’t, uh, this isn’t the 

Philistines of the business community against the honorable 

people of the Ph.D. world.  [01:22:06:26]  This is commercial 

reality versus theory.  

JAMES HARDING  

Thank you very much. [BACKGROUND LAUGHTER] [APPLAUSE]  

Uh, f-, a couple more questions, the lady up here, on the right 

hand side, middle of, down the, down here.  And there’s a 

gentleman, uh, mauve shirt in the middle.  

FEMALE QUESTIONER 

Hi, my name is Jolie Hunt [PH].  This is for James McGregor.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 57. 

 

 

 

Speaking of commercial realities, I’m very surprised that 

censorship hasn’t come up, uh, especially as we’re against this 

motion.  And it doesn’t seem like we’re, we’re comparing apples to 

apples here, it’s more like bullets to grenades.  And if we have to 

act like responsible citizens, how can we not, uh, pay attention 

when China doesn’t.  So, so the question comes to censorship 

and the notion that, uh, companies like Google and Yahoo, uh, 

have to, uh, make restrictions in news and information there 

and, and how can we compete with them in, in saying that 

America can take it?  It seems to be rather naïve.  

PANELIST 

You’re not allowed to answer that. 

JAMES HARDING  

[OVERLAPPING VOICES] Thank you.  Hmm?  

PANELIST 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES] You’re not allowed to answer that.   

JAMES HARDING  

[LAUGHS] [UNCLEAR]…and this uh, gentleman here?  

MALE QUESTIONER 

Um, hi.  My name is John Silverman.  Can you hear me?  

JAMES HARDING 

Yeah. 

JOHN SILVERMAN  

This is for any one of the gentlemen against the motion.  Here’s 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 58. 

 

 

 

my question.  China’s ability to bring, uh, produce goods for far 

less than America has cost untold numbers of our citizens to lose 

their job.  Doesn’t that mean that the China boom has already 

caused trouble for America?  

JAMES HARDING 

Thank you very much.  Um, who’d like to start with that 

question, Jim McGregor do you want to talk about the 

outsourcing problem?  

JAMES MCGREGOR 

Uh, no, I’ll talk about censorship, because that’s [BACKGROUND 

LAUGHTER], I’m, I’m in the media.  

JAMES HARDING  

OK, OK, you’re gonna, Do-, Dan, OK, let’s start, uh, Daniel Rosen 

with outsourcing.  And we’re gonna have to keep it relatively 

short, I’m afraid.   

DANIEL ROSEN  

Right, uh, the um, automobile industry was a terrible, terrible 

threat to the horse and buggy industry here in New York City.  In 

fact, there’s practically, we’re down to about a hundred people in 

horse and buggy now, and they’re all in Central Park. 

[BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]   Uh, the U.S., unlike, uh, almost 

every other, uh, great power that we’ve seen, has shown itself 

entirely open to change, to adjustment.  Instead of trying to 

defend, uh, an increasingly uncompetitive status quo, we’ve 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 59. 

 

 

 

found ways to innovate, the adjust, to continue to be competitive, 

despite the changes that necessarily take place in the world 

around us today.  Trouble is a given, change is a given.  It’s 

unfortunate, it’s different for people that are faced with the 

immediate consequences of it, but there is really very little 

alternative to it.  Finally, we have a four and a half percent 

unemployment rate in this country.  How much lower do we 

really want it to go?  

JAMES HARDING  

Thank you.  

BILL GERTZ 

On the commercial realities part, I’d like to get in a word there, 

uh…  

JAMES HARDING  

Sorry, Bill Gertz, yes.  

BILL GERTZ 

Yeah, uh, the issue of uh, China’s proliferation activities hasn’t 

been raised, but China, uh, as, uh, many of us know, gave 

nuclear technology to Pakistan in the, uh, ‘80’s and ‘90’s.  That 

nuclear technology ended up going to Libya, and uh, Iran and 

North Korea.   And uh, they even found Chinese language 

nuclear warhead design documents when they dismantled Libya’s 

nuclear program.  Uh, Chinese companies since 2001 have been 

sanctioned more than eighty times.   And uh, they’re doing this 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 60. 

 

 

 

as part of a policy that’s usually denied by the central 

government, but in reality, uh, uh, China is helping these rogue 

states with its, uh, with weapons technology, both missiles and 

weapons of mass destruction.  

JAMES HARDING  

Thank you very much, Bill Gertz.  And finally onto censorship.  

JAMES MCGREGOR  

I, I, well I’m against that too, thank you. [BACKGROUND 

LAUGHTER] Um, on censorship, the quick answer is the internet 

has changed China, and, and China is fighting a losing battle 

every day with information.  You wouldn’t believe what is on the 

blogs.  Um, Google handled it okay, Yahoo handled it terribly.  

What Google did is they had to be in that market, I’m glad they’re 

in that market because they’re pushing the envelope on, on 

freedom of information.  And what they did is they labeled their 

searches that they’re censored, which drove the Chinese 

government crazy.  Yahoo, on the other hand, caved right in, gave 

them names of people that were using Yahoo email accounts.  

Um, we have to be there, we have to be pushing for freedom on 

information, and it’s happening, let the Chinese people do it.   

JAMES HARDING 

Jim McGregor, thank you very much.  Um, I know that many 

more of you have questions.  I’m afraid, uh, we’re not gonna have 

time for them, but please feel free to maul our panelists after the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 61. 

 

 

 

debate. [BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]   Um, the uh, we now, the 

final um, stage of this is that uh, each of the panelists gets two 

minutes, uh, to sum up.  And we start with, Stape Roy.  

PANELIST 

Start with…  

PANELIST 2  

Yeah.  

PANELIST  

Start with Jim McGregor.  

PANELIST 2  

No, we’re starting with Jim.  

JAMES HARDING 

Oh sorry, yeah, it says Jim, but since Stapleton, go ahead.  Jim 

McGregor.  

JAMES MCGREGOR  

Yeah, oh, I, I don’t really know what there is to add to this, other 

than we really haven’t been talking about the Chinese people at 

all.  Why don’t we give them a chance?  The Chinese people are, 

are moving ahead very quickly.  They are not idiots, they’re very 

smart.  They’re pushing their government every day.  We’re trying 

to tell them you must be Democrats tomorrow.  The last time 

they took an, a government system from the west, it was 

Communism.   They don’t want another one of those.  Um, give 

them the time to find their own way.  You talk about, uh, the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 62. 

 

 

 

string of pearls, uh, strategy.  The string of pearls strategy I see 

every day in the markets when people are bargaining for pearls.    

Uh, they don’t want to come and attack America, they want to 

come here and go to Vegas, they want to go to Colorado skiing, 

they wanna shop on Rodeo Drive.  The Chinese are joining the 

world.  This is not a, a country, uh, run by monsters who want to 

take over the United States.  They just want to be somebody in 

the world, and if, if we handle them with some, uh, some skill 

and some, uh, some sympathy.  But also tough where they are 

violating international rules like proliferation and intellectual 

property rights, the U.S. and China can have a very good 

relationship.  I would just like to, uh, say please, um, do not tell 

uh, uh, Secretary Gates that um, that Mr. Pillsbury who works at 

the Department of Defense has asked you to vote against America 

tonight.  [BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]  America can, America can 

handle China.  

MICHAEL PILLSBURY  

Thank you, thank you.  

JAMES HARDING 

Thank you very much, Jim McGregor.  Now John Mearsheimer, 

for the motion.  

JOHN MEARSHEIMER 

Ambassador Roy made the point that Chinese leaders today don’t 

think about dominating Asia.  And I think he’s correct.  They 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 63. 

 

 

 

don’t.  And the reason that they don’t is because they do not have 

the wherewithal or anything near the wherewithal to think about 

dominating Ch-, uh, dominating Asia.  The question you have to 

ask yourself is how are the Chinese likely to think when they look 

something like the United States today, when they really are very, 

very powerful?  To give you an analogy, it’s like having money.   

Uh, I’ve gotten wealthier over time, which is not to say I’ve gotten 

wealthy.  But I’ve gotten wealthier over time, I’ve accumulated 

more money.  And I think about spending that money and doing 

things with that money in very different ways now that I have it 

than I did when I didn’t have two nickels to rub together.  And 

the point that I would make to you about China is that there’s 

gonna come a point, uh, in the story that we’re telling up here, 

where China is extremely powerful.  And I think then, it will begin 

to think about subjects like Taiwan very differently.   Of course 

the Chinese don’t want to pick a fight with the United States now 

over Taiwan, they know what would happen, they would get 

clobbered.  The question you have to ask yourself is in a world 

where China has a huge Navy, a much bigger and more efficient 

Army, more missiles, right, and the United States is at a 

significant disadvantage in East Asia, which is a great distance 

away from this country, how do you think China will then think 

about Taiwan and the possibility of using threats?  I’d bet a lot of 

money that they’ll think very differently and it won’t be to our 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 64. 

 

 

 

advantage.  

JAMES HARDING 

John Mearsheimer, thank you very much.  Now against the 

motion, Daniel Rosen.  

DANIEL ROSEN 

So much has been said, two quick concluding points.  Firstly, are 

we confident that our institutions, our way of going about 

growing an economy, spending our lives is profoundly superior, 

better to the way China is organized?  To the problems of China 

we’ve discussed this evening?    I’m confident.  And thus I’m 

confident that for China to match us in terms of wealth creation, 

prosperity over time, they’ll necessarily have to move in the 

direction of our institutions, our way of behaving in the world.  I 

have no doubt about that.  Secondly, the problems that are 

existential in nature, really threaten our welfare today, are no 

longer realist in nature.  Maybe unfortunately.  The greatest force 

projection on planet Earth could not stop 9/11 from taking place 

in this city, could it?  The challenges of global environmental 

change, climate chance, cannot be addressed in any way 

whatsoever with for-, force projection.  We are in trouble already.  

Is there trouble down the road?   There’s trouble here today.  The 

question is what evolution of China best serves our interest in 

addressing those troubles and minimizing the trouble our 

children will have to deal with, we’ll have to deal with for the rest 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 65. 

 

 

 

of our careers.  It seems abundantly clear to me that a China 

stronger, more prosperous, further down the road to Democracy 

as well, uh, is what we want to see as we turn to address all 

these problems which can no longer be dealt with just by the U.S. 

Navy.  Thanks.  

JAMES HARDING 

Daniel Rosen, thank you very much.  Now for the motion, 

Michael Pillsbury.  

MICHAEL PILLSBURY  

Thank you.  Uh, I forgot to quote from Nancy Pelosi a little bit 

earlier, uh, because you keep referring to us as the right, I 

thought perhaps you should hear a couple of sentences from the 

Speaker of the House of Representatives.  She was attacking 

President Bush last April during the visit of Hu Jintao.   She said 

that she opposed the celebratory nature of the official visit.  She 

said our own debt, uh, with China is growing so fast, they’ll soon 

be making our foreign policy.  She said trickle-down liberty is not 

going to work, it’s an illusion.  She said that we should avoid 

wishful thinking about China ever being a, becoming a 

responsible stakeholder.  She said our trade relationship with 

China has been a disaster, despite more than a decade of 

concessions, the trade deficit with China has grown from four 

billion a year to more than four billion a week.  China continues 

to manipulate its currency, making its exports cheaper and U.S. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 66. 

 

 

 

imports more expensive than they would be in a free market 

condition.  If President Bush kowtows to Beijing in ways that 

threaten our long-standing commitment to Taiwan,  members of 

both parties in Congress will be watching.  She concluded by 

saying the American people wanted the administration to show 

resolve in standing up to Beijing.  So all of you supporters in the 

audience of George Bush, be sure to vote for the other team. 

[BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]   

PANELIST  

You’re gonna vote with us then, right?    

MICHAEL PILLSBURY 

Because here is Nancy Pelosi, rather articulately saying “Beware 

the Dragon: The boom in China spells trouble for America.” 

[APPLAUSE]   

JAMES HARDING  

An extraordinary Intelligence Squared moment there, Michael 

Pelosi, Michael, I was gonna say Michael Pelosi, Michael Pillsbury 

channeling his inner Nancy Pelosi, thank you very much. 

[BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]   Stapleton Roy now going to 

channel, I don’t know who, I think Stapleton Roy finishing up 

against the motion.  

STAPLETON ROY 

Let’s look at the process.  China was outside the system, thirty 

years ago.  It favored polar variation.  We have had trouble with 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 67. 

 

 

 

China every stage of the process, but it’s been moving toward 

becoming a more responsible part of the international 

community.  It signed a nuclear non-proliferation treaty in 1992.  

It signed a comprehensive test ban treaty two years later.  It now 

cooperates with the missile technology control regime.  We’ve 

sanctioned them in various way at every stage of this process, 

China has improved.  But it has been troublesome.  So it’s not 

easy to deal with China.  But look at the trend.  Look at Asia.  

Asia is the one country in the, uh, the one region of the world 

where every authoritarian system that has gone through thirty to 

forty years of rapid economic development, has stayed open to 

the outside world, has been embedded in the global economic 

system, and it’s had friendly relations with the United States,  

has moved from authoritarian systems of government to 

representative forms of government, no exceptions.  South Korea, 

Taiwan, Thailand, Indonesia.  China’s only partway along that. 

It’s a strategic gamble.  If China doesn’t become wealthier, it’s not 

going to become democratic.  But if China becomes wealthier, it 

becomes more powerful.  That’s a challenge for our diplomacy.  

Are we up to it?  You bet we are.  We’re good at it.  When we give 

ourselves a chance.  We know how to use the right balance of 

power and influence, and if we get it right, China can we a more 

prosperous, friendly country to the United States.  It’s not going 

to run roughshod in its own neighborhood because it’ll be 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 68. 

 

 

 

slapped down by not just the United States.   We don’t have to 

deal with China alone.  If we have good relations with Japan, with 

Russia, with India, and with the other countries of East Asia, 

China is not going to have the opportunity.  That’ s our challenge.  

It’s a good challenge.    I say neither beware nor embrace the 

dragon.  Be realistic and advance our own interests intelligently…  

JAMES HARDING 

Stapleton Roy, your time.  Thank you very much. [APPLAUSE].  

PANELIST 

Bravo, bravo, [LAUGHS].  

JAMES HARDING 

And finally, for the motion, Bill Gertz.  

BILL GERTZ 

Yes, thank, I, I wanna thank the Intelligence Squared for this 

debate.  I think it’s a very important, uh, debate.  And the debate 

we’re having tonight I think is reflective of a debate that’s 

currently going on at the highest levels of the U.S. government.  

And that debate can be characterized, uh, on the one side you 

have Condoleezza Rice going to Beijing shortly before she became 

Secretary of State and said, “We want a strong China.”  On the 

other side of the debate are people in the national security 

community, the Pentagon, who said, “Wait a minute.  There are 

so many unknowns about China.  We don’t know what takes 

place.  We don’t know.”  When we have all of these military 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 69. 

 

 

 

exchanges that Mike Pillsbury talks about, one of the first 

questions is, “What is the extent of the military buildup of 

China?”  The Chinese will not answer.  When you combine that 

with China’s use of deception, that is, deliberate strategic 

misinformation to misguide us.  We know very little about it.  

Therefore it is, it is dangerous in my view that we should, uh, 

want to see a strong China, and that, uh, really we have to keep 

our powder dry until we can find out what goes on in the inner 

councils of, of the Chinese system.   Uh, and for that reason, I, I 

urge you to vote uh, for the motion tonight.   

JAMES HARDING 

Bill Gertz, thank you very much.  Well, that uh, brings to and 

end, the um, the talking, and now for the action.  We return to 

these uh, crazy contraptions, your um, your voting pads.  Please 

uh, pick them up again, and let’s see if I can get it right this time.  

[BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]  Could you, in, in voting, press 

“one” if you’re for the motion, “two” if you’re against the motion, 

and “three” if you’re still undecided.  So could you cast your vote 

now?  [LAUGHS] Michael Pillsbury has just told me that it’s like 

American Idol, um… [LAUGHS] [BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]  I’m 

not sure on that basis, uh, who will win.  [LAUGHS]   

PANELIST 

…they’ll kick us all off.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 70. 

 

 

 

JAMES HARDING  

Exactly.  Um, now before um, before I tell you the results of the 

vote, I just want to take care of couple of things.  Firstly, I’d like 

to thank our panel of debaters, Stapleton Roy, Daniel Rosen, uh, 

Jim McGregor, Michael Pillsbury, John Mearsheimer, and Bill 

Gertz, thank you very much indeed. [APPLAUSE].  I also would 

like to thank you, the audience, for your, uh, thoughtful 

engagement, uh, here this evening.  Don’t need to give yourself 

another round of applause [BACKGROUND LAUGHTER], that 

was more than good enough.   Um, but then of course I’d really 

like to thank, uh, Intelligence Squared, which was brought this, 

uh, the eighth, uh, and final debate of this season, um, uh, here 

to the U.S.  Uh, it’s been an extraordinary success and brought 

really substantive and complicated issues to be, to be debated 

and be discussed, uh, in, in what I hope you’ll agree is a very en-, 

engaging and thought provoking way.  Um, you will of course be 

hungering for the next debate, and uh, it is “Spreading 

democracy in the Middle East is a bad idea.”  [BACKGROUND 

LAUGHTER]  Uh, it, that will be held, on uh, Tuesday, September 

the 18th.  “Spreading democracy in the Middle East is a bad idea.”  

Um, before you maul our panelists, you may want to uh, rush 

out and uh, get tickets for the full season.  And while I’m doing 

the plugs, let me tell you that if you want to go and listen to this 

whole thing all over again, you certainly should do on WNYC, uh, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation - Intelligence Squared U.S. - Beware the Dragon:  

 A booming China spells trouble for America Page 71. 

 

 

 

AM820 on Friday, May the 25th, at uh, seven in the evening.  And 

we’re very uh, uh, much appreciate, uh, the support from them.  

And, and again, there are copies of books by Bill Gertz and Jim 

McGregor, you know, which are for sale upstairs.  Uh, and there 

are also DVDs of previous debates available from Intelligence 

Squared. Uh, while I’m about it, I should tell you there are copies 

of The Times of London newspaper upstairs, so pick one of those 

up, they, they have the, uh, glorious advantage of being free this 

evening for you. [BACKGROUND LAUGHTER]   Uh, now, finally, 

let’s get to business.  What are the results of the debate?  Now, 

let me remind you where you stood before the debate.  Forty-one 

percent were for the motion, and just so I do this properly, 

“Beware the Dragon: A booming China,” sorry, “Beware the 

Dragon: A booming China spells trouble for America.”  Before the 

debate, forty-one percent for the motion, thirty-seven percent 

against the motion, twenty-one percent undecided.  After the 

debate, 35 percent for the motion, 58.6 percent against the 

motion [APPLAUSE], 6.1 percent undecided.  The team against 

the motion wins. [APPLAUSE] Thank you very much indeed. 

END OF DEBATE 

  

 


