
 
MEDIA TRANSCRIPTS, INC. 

41 WEST 83rd STREET  NEW YORK, N.Y.  10024   (212)  362-1481 

 

FOR The Rosenkranz Foundation/ 
Intelligence Squared US 

 

DATE 11/13/07 

IT’S TIME TO END AFFIRMATIVE ACTION 
Moderator:                 Robert Siegel 

For the motion:          John McWhorter, Terence Pell, Joseph Phillips 

Against the motion:  Khin Mai Aung, Kimberle Crenshaw, Tim Wise 

 . 

 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Right now, I’d like to introduce the, uh, chairman of the 

Rosenkranz Foundation, which is the sponsor of Intelligence 

Squared, Robert Rosenkranz, who will frame tonight’s debate.   

[APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT ROSENKRANZ 

Thank you, Robert, and, uh, welcome back.  Uh, on my behalf 

and on behalf of Dana Wolfe our executive producer it’s a 

pleasure to welcome you.  Well, our debate tonight is, in our 

minds anyway in the context of admissions to our elite 

universities and graduate schools: Is it time to end affirmative 

action?  Our topic tonight seems on the face of it ideological.  Uh, 

liberals feel it’s—affirmative action is needed to, uh, create 

opportunities for blacks and Hispanics and to meet a societal 

need, uh, for racial diversity in the universities, and in leadership 

positions thereafter.   Conservatives believe that color-blindness 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 2. 

 

 

 

is a bedrock Constitutional principle.  We see the issue as more 

nuanced.  Let me focus exclusively on what might be considered 

conservative ideas to— to show why.  The conservative case 

against affirmative action includes these elements.  First, 

affirmative action is a euphemism for admitting blacks and 

Hispanics to selective universities, despite wide gaps in SAT 

scores and grades.  Discriminating on the basis of race is 

inherently unfair and offensive, particularly when it’s done by 

governments.  The beneficiaries of affirmative action are not the 

truly disadvantaged, they are mostly middle-class.   The legal 

framework around affirmative action offers no coherent rationale, 

and no clear guidelines to acceptable conduct.  So, that’s the, uh, 

the conservative case.  But there’s a conservative case for 

affirmative action as well.   And it’s grounded in the ideas of free 

association, choice, and competition.  Our elite universities 

compete with one another vigorously, for students, for faculty, for 

contributions, research funds, and most fundamentally, for the 

prestige and influence of producing future leaders.   Their 

mission is not fulfilled simply by admitting candidates with the 

highest grades.  Instead they routinely favor athletes, creative 

artists, students from poor families and unusual geographies, 

black and Hispanic applicants, as well as children of generous 

alumni.   They must recognize that overweighting these elements 

in their portfolio of admitted students, underweights other 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 3. 

 

 

 

elements, and most obviously Asian students with a predilection 

for the sciences.   So either the portfolio of admitted students is 

optimal, or, competition with—among universities will correct it.  

Politicians or courts or voters for that matter, have little useful to 

contribute.  So our debate tonight is, it’s time to end affirmative 

action, and that goes to the merits of the matter.   But in 

listening to the facts and, uh, arguments marshaled by our 

panelists this evening, you might wanna keep in mind the 

question, time for whom.  I’m delighted to welcome back our 

moderator Robert Siegel, the long-time National Public Radio host 

of “All Things Considered,” Robert, the evening is yours.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Thank you.  Thank you, Bob.  [APPLAUSE]  Thank you, Bob 

Rosenkranz, and I’d like to welcome you all to the fourth debate 

of the second Intelligence Squared US series.  The resolution 

being debated tonight is, “It’s time to end affirmative action,” and 

let me give you a brief rundown of the evening.   Uh, members of 

each team will alternate in presenting their side of the argument, 

presentations are limited to eight minutes each.  Uh, when 

opening arguments are complete, I’ll open the floor to questions 

from the audience.   Uh, after the question-and-answer session, 

each debater will make a final two-minute summation, and 

finally, you will vote on tonight’s motion with the keypad that’s 

attached to the armrest of your seat and I’ll announce your 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 4. 

 

 

 

decision on what side carried the day after the debate, but we’ll 

start with a pre-debate vote.   Uh, please pick up the keypad 

that’s attached to the armrest on your left…looks like this.  Uh, 

and for audience members who are sitting along the aisle, uh, to 

my right, uh, your keypad is attached to the armrest on your 

right side next to your neighbor’s.   Now again today’s resolution 

is, “It’s time, uh, to end affirmative action.”  After my prompt, uh, 

press 1 to vote for that motion, 2 to vote against it, and 3 if you 

are undecided.  You may gin [sic] voting—you may begin voting 

rather, now.   

[PAUSE]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Good.  And I’ll reveal the results of your pre-debate vote, uh, later 

in the evening.  I’d like now to introduce, uh, the panel, and 

please, uh, hold your applause or any other reaction until after 

all six [LAUGHTER] are introduced.   Uh, first arguing for the 

motion, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute and columnist 

for the New York Sun, John McWhorter.  The president of the 

Center for Individual Rights, Terence Pell, and actor, social 

commentator and syndicated columnist, Joseph Phillips.   Uh, 

and against the motion are, staff attorney for the Asian-American 

Legal Defense and Education Fund, Khin Mai Aung, professor of 

law at UCLA and Columbia Law School is Kimberlé Crenshaw, 

and writer and educator, uh, Tim Wise.  I’d like to now, uh, call 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 5. 

 

 

 

our debaters, uh, to rise to the podium and to give their, their 

opening, uh, statements, on the motion,  “It’s time to end 

affirmative action,” eight debater has eight minutes, I’ll give a 

one-minute warning.  Uh, first, Joseph Phillips for the motion.    

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

Thanks.  Hoo, boy.  [LAUGHS]  Feel like I did before my first love 

scene with Halle Berry, so, you can—  [LAUGHTER]  imagine, if 

you have any imagination at all the butterflies, and actually the 

excitement.  Uh, because I’m here in defense of what I think is 

one of the, uh, cornerstones of our republic, that of non-

discrimination.   And I think it was articulated in Brown vs. the 

Board of Education when, decided that discrimination in our 

public schools was unconstitutional, became part of our cultural 

lexicon a few years later when Presidents Kennedy and Johnson 

issued an executive order, that stately clearly and 

unambiguously, that, affirmative action should be taken to 

ensure that hiring, uh, decisions were made without regard to 

race.   And then of course it was given teeth in the law, uh, 

through the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which was very clear, that, 

uh, discrimination based on race was unlawful.  And, uh, to 

quote, uh…an ‘80s sitcom, uh, it’s a different world from where 

ya come from.   That was then, that was good old-fashioned non-

discrimination, and it was good for America.  Well times have 

changed, and what we’re talking about now, affirmative action is 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 6. 

 

 

 

no longer about non-discrimination, it’s about racial preferences.  

And that is what we oppose—racial preferences.   Now, that 

doesn’t mean that we believe that racism has suddenly 

disappeared.  It hasn’t.  We know that racism exists.  Listen.  I’m 

45 years old.  I’ve been black in America for a long time.  I have 

seen racism, I have been the victim of racism, I’m not about to 

stand up here and pretend, that it doesn’t exist.  But the 

question before us is not, does racism exist, the question is, are 

racial preferences an effective means to combat racism.   And the 

answer is simply no.  There isn’t any evidence at all, that racial 

preferences actually benefits us in terms of our race relations, in 

fact, what evidence there is points to just the opposite.  What we 

do know, is that racial preferences tend to, to en—enhance, and, 

and firm up negative stereotypes, particularly as it pertains to 

black intellectual capacity and academic capabilities.  Um… You 

know…there was a saying that my mother had.  And I hear it in 

my head right now.  There is no monopoly on brain power.  That’s 

what my mother said all the time, there is no monopoly on brain 

power, black people can compete, we can compete on the athletic 

field, we can compete in the symphony halls, and we can 

compete in the classrooms.   And what’s more, my mother said, 

you can compete, and you will compete.  But there are some folks 

who, sadly, are gonna tell my children something very different.  

And you don’t have to take my word for it, let’s just look at what 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 7. 

 

 

 

they say.   Richard Atkinson, former president of the University of 

California at Berkeley, standing before an audience similar to 

this, at University of San Diego, said that it was highly doubtful if 

not impossible that we would achieve diversity on our nation’s 

premiere campuses without the use of racial preferences.   Now 

Atkinson was not standing before a curious world, telling 

everybody he’s just a big fat racist, and unless you rein me in I’m 

gonna start discriminating right and left!  No.  What he was 

saying is that there is a monopoly on brain power, and that black 

students don’t have it in sufficient quantity to show up in 

significant numbers in our nation’s campuses.   Now if you’re not 

sufficiently…offended, as you should be, let’s take something else 

that you often hear in discussions like this.  Someone, maybe 

here or over here, is bound to stand up and say whoa!  I 

benefited from affirmative action.  You benefited from affirmative 

action, she benefited from affirmative action.   And of course, 

they’re not saying, well, you benefited from non-discrimination.  

Well I did and that’s a good thing.  What they’re saying is, I 

couldn’t qualify, you couldn’t qualify, she couldn’t qualify…  

Absurd.   Miss Krimberle [sic]—Kimberlé Crenshaw there.  I’ve 

met her for the first time, I’ve read what she’s written, I’ve heard 

her on the radio, this is a smart, dynamic woman.  The idea, that 

but for racial preferences, Miss Crenshaw would be standing on 

the corner singing doo wop someplace is offensive to me, and it 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 8. 

 

 

 

should be offensive to all in the sound of my voice.   Now, you’re 

gonna hear a lotta statistics today, I’m not gonna talk to you 

about statistics.  I’m gonna talk to you about people, because 

racial preferences impact and affect people.  This past April, 

spring, my wife was at a birthday party with our, with our 

children.  And…the mothers are sitting there talking, the fathers 

in there, you know, that, you tend to avoid these things like the 

plague so I wasn’t there.   Uh…but the mothers are grouped and 

they’re talking about their children, where they go to school and 

it comes to light, that my oldest boy attends a magnet program, 

uh, for highly gifted students.   Without missing a beat…one of 

the other mothers says, well, you know, now, with this Supreme 

Court decision they won’t be able to accept, uh, kids in these 

programs for diversity.  [PAUSE]  Well, my wife was kinder than I 

would have been.   After she picked her jaw up off the floor she 

explained to the woman, look.  He’s not in this program because 

he checked some box.  You can’t get in this program unless you 

score 99.9 percent on the test.  Let me repeat that—99.9 percent 

on the test.   And, he’s making straight A’s.  In this program.  

And what is more ironic, is that the woman she was talking to, is 

a teacher in the Los Angeles Unified School District.  That…is the 

evil of racial preferences.   That, is the real-life impact of racial 

preferences.  Teachers, who lack faith in the academic abilities of 

their students, and children, who no matter how hard they work, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 9. 

 

 

 

no matter how…how broad their gifts…  are stained with 

preference.  With, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, benefi—fishi—fishishence.  

[LAUGHTER]  That’s Greek.  [LAUGHTER]   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One.    

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

And my child is not the only one, there are thousands, and 

thousands of students just like him, who cannot enter our 

nation’s college campuses boldly and confidently.  They enter, 

again, dripping with the stigma of racial preferences.  And I’m 

here to tell you tonight, that that is not good for America.  Thank 

you.   

[APPLAUSE]    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Thank you, uh, Joseph Phillips, speaking in favor of the motion.  

Uh, now, to make an opening statement against the motion, “It’s 

time to end affirmative action,” Tim Wise.    

TIM WISE 

Thank you.  [CLEARS THROAT]  You know, it always amazes me, 

to hear critics of affirmative action speak about this subject, as if 

racial preference were something that were invented in the ‘60s, 

to benefit people of color.  Because in fact whether we wish to 

acknowledge it or not and of course we don’t, the entire history of 

this country is the history of affirmative action for white folks like 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 10. 

 

 

 

myself.   And unless we begin by discussing that affirmative 

action, and the impact that it has had we engage in a discussion 

that is both ethically and practically irresponsible.  Contrary to 

what Joseph tells you this debate is about the extent to which 

racism still exists because it in—  is indeed the existence of that 

racism which necessitated affirmative action in the beginning, 

and continues to necessitate it today.  Whether we wish to 

acknowledge it or not, enslavement, Indian genocide, segregation, 

did not only oppress people of color, they elevated white folks, 

and provided us with opportunities that we did not in fact earn.   

The Homestead Act allowed whites to claim over 270 million 

acres of land for virtually nothing down, at a time when folks of 

color could not, today there are 40 million white folks descended 

directly from those, who received that land giveaway, millions of 

them, still living on the property, they owe their lives to 

affirmative action.   Then there was the FHA home-loan program 

which for the first 30 years of its existence, operated in a whites-

only fashion, lending over $120 billion worth of government-

backed housing equity to whites, thereby creating the white 

middle class.   And in large measure because of those 

preferences, the typical black college couple, college-degreed 

couple starts out with less than one-fifth the net worth of a 

typical young white couple because the latter of those, has likely 

received the benefits of their family’s prior head start while the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 11. 

 

 

 

former, are likely to have accumulated far less having had less 

chance to do so.   So against that backdrop, ending affirmative 

action would only further cement the systemic advantages for 

whites that have been in place for hundreds of years, it would be 

tantamount to favoring those three laps ahead in a five-lap race 

even though those are ahead gained their head start as the result 

of an unfair process,  but even worse, to end affirmative action 

would ignore the ongoing reality, not past, but ongoing reality, of 

white racial preference, and not only in education, but also in 

employment, and let me clarify, we were not told that our 

remarks tonight had to focus only on higher education.   That 

resolution doesn’t mention higher education, I will not speak of it 

only with regard to schools.  Because it is not only there that it 

matters.  According to the Office of Federal Contract Compliance, 

three out of four companies covered by affirmative action 

regulations violate them regularly, and not just that, but are also 

in violation of basic civil rights law.  The problem is the OFCCP 

only has enough monitors to check up on the companies under 

their purview once every 46 years.  So there’s no deterrent.  But 

those who would end affirmative action never call for beefing up 

civil rights enforcement, indeed, though his teammates might not 

know it,  Mr. Pell’s organization advocates abolishing anti-

discrimination law altogether, as it regards the private sector, so, 

Joseph can sing the praises of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, but the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 12. 

 

 

 

man sitting next to him, would get rid of it as it regards private 

organizations,  so to endorse the resolution would only intensify 

the problem of discrimination, those who would end affirmative 

action ignore the study, recent study, which found that job 

applicants with white-sounding names have a 50 percent greater 

chance of getting a call-back for an interview than those with 

black-sounding names even when qualifications are 

indistinguishable.   They ignore, not only that, but the research 

which has found that eight in 10 jobs are never advertised, 

instead they’re filled by networking, a process that mostly 

excludes people of color and women of all colors and elevates 

whites and men not because we are better for certain jobs but 

because we know the right people,  and if affirmative action none 

of that would change for the better…if anything it would get 

worse, the same is true for schooling.  Our opponents will rail 

against so-called preferences of students of color while they 

ignore the preferences built in for whites.   So they condemn the 

University of Michigan for giving 20 points on a 150-point scale to 

students of color but they ignored the points that were in 

practice, essentially for whites only.  Like the 16 points you got, if 

you were from the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.  The snow is not 

the only thing white there.  [LAUGHTER]   The 10 points, just 

because you went to a top high school which means your parents 

live in the right zip code.  The eight points for taking advanced-



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 13. 

 

 

 

placement classes, which are three times more available in 

schools serving white kids than kids that serve mostly students 

of color or the four points you got if Daddy went to Michigan.   

They rally behind Jennifer Gratz, as the supposed victim of 

reverse discrimination because the year she was rejected, there 

were about 85 students of color who got into the Michigan 

despite having lower scores and grades but they say nothing 

about the 1400—let me repeat— 1400 white students with lower 

grades and lower scores than Jenny Gratz, who got in.   You see, 

less-qualified white people are no problem, but less-qualified 

people of color, my goodness, we can’t have that.  They say 

nothing about the study from six weeks ago which found that for 

every one student of color, who receives any benefit from 

affirmative action in college there are at least two whites, for 

every one person of color two whites, who also didn’t meet the 

requirements but got in because Daddy wrote a check, or Mama 

made a phone call, or somebody pulled strings and got them in, 

but affirmative action for rich white people is never a problem for 

the folks like our opponents.   While they insist affirmative action 

is racist because it holds people of color to lower standards the 

fact is, it is whites who have held to lower standards, it is whites 

and only whites I would suggest who can get C’s all the way 

through school, brag about their mediocrity publicly, mangle the 

English language, and go on to become Presidents of the United 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 14. 

 

 

 

States.  [APPLAUSE]   So, when they lament the supposed 

damage done to student [sic] of color by affirmative action 

because it supposedly forces them to question their abilities, ask 

yourself, why no concern for the mental health and self-image of 

white Americans, who have being preferred [sic] for 400 years,  

and if their argument is correct, must be the most self-hating 

people on the face of Planet Earth.  And no, affirmative action 

doesn’t place people of color in positions for which they’re 

unqualified, indeed, once we control for economic status 

comparing only whites and folks of color from families with both 

the same income and wealth profile, there is no difference in 

college graduation rates, and only an insignificant difference in 

college grades.  And black students at the most selective schools, 

actually do better in relation to their white counterparts than 

those in less-selective schools.   Furthermore according to 200 

different studies on the subject—not just one that I’m pulling out 

of my ass but 200 different studies—employees who have 

benefited from affirmative action perform equal to or better than 

their white male counterparts once given a chance to improve 

themselves, so in closing, unless our opponents can show you 

that they have some alternative mechanism for addressing that 

legacy of white racial preference—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 15. 

 

 

 

TIM WISE 

—and the ongoing advantages extended to whites in this country, 

unless they can demonstrate some alternative means, by which 

true equal opportunity to flourish to vote for them, and to vote for 

ending affirmative action is to engage in an act of irresponsible 

racial aggression.   It is to ignore the wisdom of Dr. King who said 

quite clearly in 1963, quote, “Whenever this issue of 

compensatory or preferential treatment is raised, some of our 

friends recoil in horror.  The Negro should be granted equality, 

they insist, but should ask for nothing more.  While at first that 

seems unreasonable, in fact it is unrealistic, for it is obvious that 

if you take a man and put him at the starting line of a race, 300 

years after another man, the first man would have to perform 

some incredible feat in order to catch up,” end of quote.   And to 

end affirmative action even does violence to the logic displayed by 

Ronald Reagan, whose mention alongside the word logic, is rare, 

coming from me, but who said as governor of California, when 

signing into law that state’s affirmative action policy—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Thank you, Tim Wise, for that opening statement.   

TIM WISE 

I didn’t get my one-minute warning, but if I could finish the quote 

from—    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 16. 

 

 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL  

No, I think—   

TIM WISE 

If I could finish the quote from—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

No, I—   

TIM WISE 

—Reagan I’d appreciate it—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

—I—I think everyone else in the room heard it, uh, Tim, why 

don’t you take a seat, sorry, you’ll, you’ll have time later—   

TIM WISE 

That’s fine—    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Thank you, Tim Wise.  [APPLAUSE]  Thank you, Tim Wise, for 

that statement, uh… against the motion.  I’ll say “One” still 

louder, uh, throughout the evening.  Uh, and now for a 

statement, uh, in favor of the motion “It’s time to end affirmative 

action,” uh, John McWhorter, please go to the podium.    

JOHN MCWHORTER 

I think that when we discuss, um, racial preferences and I am 

gonna largely restrict what I’m saying to racial preferences in 

universities although many of these things also apply to 

affirmative action as handled elsewhere…we often are under the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 17. 

 

 

 

impression that what we’re talking about is something as simple 

as a tie-breaking process, a thumb on the scale,  the idea being 

that, if qualifications are equal or more less equal between a 

black and a white candidate, that, one gives the nod to the black 

person.  I personally would find nothing problematic with that 

policy, I don’t think most people would.   And to the extent that it 

is generally implied, generally via omission, that that’s what we’re 

talking about when we talk about racial preferences and that 

we’re not talking about qualifications or test scores, or things 

that we don’t wanna talk about—   then it’s understandable that 

there reigns a sense that, to be opposed to these racial preference 

policies means that a person must be naïve or unfeeling or have a 

sinister agenda or something like that, all of that is, is perfectly, 

perfectly understandable.   And then certain words are used, 

“inequality,” “resegregation,” “white privilege,” “societal racism,” 

et cetera, and all of those concepts are important, there is a great 

deal of injustice in the country now and there always has been 

and we should think about it.   But, those words also have a kind 

of rhetorical power that I think distracts us from the actual logic 

of the case here, and what racial justice is, that is how we 

actually solve the problems that I think we’re all concerned with.   

And…from what I’ve seen over my years in discussing this 

question, there are certain basic facts about how racial 

preferences are played out, that were not often told, I don’t think 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 18. 

 

 

 

that people who think differently than me are willfully ignoring 

these things, I think these things just don’t get out there very 

much but they are absolutely crucial, to evaluating this 

particular case, and in my remaining seven minutes and about 

13 seconds I just wanna give you a few of those things, for one 

thing, affirmative action, racial preferences as we’re talking 

about, is not just a tie-breaker.  If that’s really all this debate has 

been about, I never would’ve joined it.  There are all sorts of 

things.  In 1991, in terms of all of the students who were 

admitted to selective law schools, um, there were 420 black ones, 

24 were admitted according to what the qualifications were 

considered to be appropriate for, for white and Asian students, all 

the rest of them just based on the numbers wouldn’t have gotten 

in.   I respect what Tim Wise has said, we have very different data 

in terms of the qualifications, if it were true the qualifications 

were the same, this would be a rather vacuous and petty debate.  

But the fact is, that according to anything that I know, they’re 

not.   For example, one argument that we might hear before we 

leave tonight is that SAT’s are meaningless.  Now there are 

dueling studies on that, I’m not sure exactly where one is to 

stand as a good-thinking person at this point.   But certainly, it 

bears mentioning, that if you looked at UC Berkeley 

undergraduates who were black and their graduation rates after 

1988, they actually tracked in virtual lock-step with SAT scores.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 19. 

 

 

 

The lower the score, the more likely the person was to graduate, 

that suggests to me something that I think all of us know deep 

down, which is that, no matter how you jigger the statistics, SAT 

scores do mean something, not everything, of course, but they do 

mean something.   Or, for example, Richard Sandor has shown 

that, um…with, um, black students admitted to 163 law schools, 

that, because so very many of them were admitted not according 

to the qualifications that they submitted but out of a sense of a 

commitment to diversity and lowering standards,  that over half 

of them were in the bottom 10 percent of their class and that 

wasn’t only in they first year, and that there was a truly alarming 

rate of failing the bar exam.  Now, these are all difficult issues 

but things like this, and needless to say, I could go on for a very 

long time but I’ve only got eight minutes—they have to be 

brought into a debate like this, they cannot be ignored, they 

cannot be trivialized.  These things are real.   Also, to eliminate 

racial preferences at selective universities does not deny black 

people an education.  At UC San Diego before the ban on racial 

preferences out in California, exactly one out of 3,268 freshmen 

who were black, were making honors.   After the ban, 20 percent 

of black students were making honors, because the students who 

would have been admitted to Berkeley or UCLA were now 

admitted to UC-San Diego.  I think that was a good thing.  It 

certainly wasn’t a bad thing.  And it’s something that needs to be 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 20. 

 

 

 

talked about.   Let’s talk a little bit about diversity, because I 

think that’s gonna come up.  For one thing, I remember being in 

college, and this is purely anecdotal, but, the idea of someone 

calling on me in class to talk about, you know, my take on the 

black experience or what the black perspective on things was, 

was something that made me sweat bullets and I’ve heard this 

from countless black undergraduates,  many of whom tell me 

when I’m doing a book tour that to them, that’s evidence that 

there’s racism at universities, that they’re expected to be diverse 

representatives.  So we can talk about diversity, but, how does it 

actually feel to be a diverse person.   More to the point.  It’s often 

said that diversity has been proven to make for a better-quality 

education.  Has it?  How.  Like if you’ve ever actually looked into 

that, the people who try to prove it with studies, and none of 

them are conservatives, find again and again, that, as I think we 

all knew, diversity does not really have anything to do with giving 

you a more beneficial experience in terms of how much 

knowledge you have in your head or how much moral wisdom 

you have in your head, after you come from college.  There was a 

poll of University of Michigan minority, um, law-school grads 

from 1970 to 1996.  To them, being called on as a diverse person 

in class was at the very bottom of what they valued most about 

their experience as was the diversity.  What they most valued in 

their experience was how smart teachers and their fellow 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 21. 

 

 

 

students were, remember this is minority students.  Or, Mitchell 

J. Chang showed that in terms of diversity in your undergraduate 

experience, it did mean that you talked about race more on 

campus, but it didn’t mean that you had more friends of another 

race and it didn’t improve your GPA and it didn’t improve how 

you feel about going to college.   Stephen Cole and Elinor Barber 

have shown that when black students are placed in schools 

where they actually would have been more appropriately placed 

in terms of qualifications and qualifications do matter, into 

schools like these,  then, what happened is that they made lower 

grades which discouraged them from going to get Ph.D.’s.  This 

was a study done by good liberal people, they did not expect it.  

But that means that we have fewer black academics because of 

these policies.  Now based on the things that I’ve mentioned, and 

clear—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One.    

JOHN MCWHORTER 

—clearly they belong at the table.  I do wanna say one thing.  The 

idea that all of these sorts of things that I’ve discussed, and the 

fact that there are other ways of addressing this problem, are 

there, and they’re worth talking about.   The notion that anybody 

would say, that, a legacy student is something that black 

students should be proud to compare themselves to, or, that a 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 22. 

 

 

 

legacy student is something that is okay, I— I—I don’t get it, I 

met legacy students when I was in school, it was not a pretty 

picture.   I certainly do not agree with these legacy policies, 

however, because I’m black, I’m talking about this kind of policy 

as it is applied to people of my race because I think that it hurts 

them.  I’m not gonna make some hoary argument about the 

Constitution, or something like that.   I don’t think that it helps 

black students to be the best that they can be.  And I think I’ll 

stop there.  But there are issues in this debate that we simply 

don’t hear about.  It’s not as simple as just being against 

resegregation—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

John McWhorter—  

JOHN MCWHORTER 

—and calling for diversity, thank you—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

You can stop right there, in fact.  Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  Uh, 

John McWhorter, thank you for that statement, uh, supporting 

the motion, “It’s time to end affirmative action.”  Uh, now a 

statement from Khin Mai Aung, against the motion.    

KHIN MAI AUNG 

Well, one thing that John McWhorter’s right about is that we are 

gonna talk about diversity today and, it’s not bec—  I’m not 

advocating it because I believe that every black person has the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 23. 

 

 

 

same experience, and ‘cause I believe that black people should 

have to carry the mantle of the black experience for our 

educational benefit, any more than I represent the same 

perspective as any other Asian person.  I wanna tell you a little 

story about, um, my own experience, very recently I, I bought a 

house, um, in the Ditmas Park area of Brooklyn.  And it’s been, 

um, heralded as the most diverse census track in the country.   

And so when I moved there, I found that, you know, the adults, 

they were, they were a little bit more hesitant to mix.   Um, but 

the—but the young people at the, at the, at the pizza place, hung 

out, uh, with people of all different backgrounds, and little kids at 

the, at the, uh, playground were willing to play with each other, 

from all different backgrounds.   And, this is something that I 

value.  It’s to something that I think is easy, it’s not something 

that I think comes naturally.  But it’s something that’ll only 

happen when people go to school together, when people are 

exposed to each other.  And, preferably at an earlier age, and also 

in, in, in higher education.   And you— so you should vote with 

us, if you agree with that statement, if you agree that a racially 

diverse environment is beneficial.  If you believe that diversity 

enhances the educational experience, and that diversity is good 

for business and the economy.   You should also vote with us, if 

you want a level playing field, not a false meritocracy, that is 

actually full of hidden benefits for the children of donors and 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 24. 

 

 

 

legacies.  Now, some of you may be wondering why I, a lawyer at 

the Asian-American Legal Defense and Education Fund, is here 

speaking out in support of affirmative action.   Foes of affirmative 

action often like to say that Asians are the ones that are most 

harmed by affirmative action, that’s simply not true.  First of all, 

many Asian groups, Southeast Asians in particular who face 

numerous educational disadvantages, need and benefit from 

affirmative action in all contexts and in particular, higher 

education.  And all Asian-Americans need and benefit from 

affirmative action employment.   So, I wanna echo what Tim Wise 

said is that we’re talking not just about diversity, about, uh, 

affirmative action in education, we’re talking about affirmative 

action in a variety of different contexts, including education, 

public contracting and so forth.   And we’re also not just talking 

about a black and white paradigm, we’re talking about how 

affirmative action benefits other people of color, as well as 

women.  So you should vote for us.  If you value a diverse and 

inclusive society, and want a broad variety of experiences and 

viewpoints represented at our most prestigious, uh, educational 

institutions and workplaces.   Business leaders have long realized 

the value of diversity.  When the University of Michigan’s 

affirmative action programs were challenged before the United 

States Supreme Court, 65 leading American businesses, and 

their CEO’s filed a brief in support of affirmative action.  These 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 25. 

 

 

 

included American Express, Chevron and Microsoft, Boeing, 

Nike, and the list goes on.   They realized that the leaders of 

tomorrow needed exposure to diverse people, ideas and 

perspectives.  These companies found that individuals educated 

in a diverse setting were more likely to succeed and they had very 

concrete, concrete examples of, of these benefits.   They believed 

that—they realized that people who were educated in a diverse 

setting were more likely to facilitate creative problem-solving 

approaches, they would—they can develop progra—uh, uh, 

products that appeal to a diverse customer base.   They are 

better able to work with diverse business partners, clients and 

employees, and they’re more likely to contribute to a positive 

work environment.  These companies need, and I quote, “the 

talent and creativity of a workplace that is”— or workforce 

rather—“that is as diverse as the world around them.”  Minority 

professionals are also more likely to provide needed services to 

underserved communities.   And this has been found in studies 

about minority doctors.  Um, incidentally I—I think that this 

point was acknowledged by my colleague John McWhorter on the 

other side.  In a study by the New—that was published in the 

New England Journal of Medicine in 1996, it found that black and 

Latino communities were four times more likely to have a 

shortage of doctors, and, incidentally, black doctors tend to 

practice in communities with five times as many blacks as 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 26. 

 

 

 

communities where other doctors practice.  They also have more 

black patients, and more Medicaid patients.  Latino doctors, 

similarly, tend to practice in communities with twice as many 

Latinos as communities where other doctors are, and they also 

have more Latino patients and more uninsured patients.  You 

should also vote with us if you believe in leveling the playing 

field.  Women and minorities still face obstacles gaining 

admissions to our most selective universities and workplaces.   

And the College Board’s own studies show that SAT’s are skewed 

in favor of whites and the wealthy.  So, yeah, do I say the SAT’s 

meaningless, probably not.  But, what is that meaning and who 

is it skewed in favor of, des—and despite these advantages that 

whites still have with standardized tests, there are still twice as 

many whites as minorities with below-average scores, in the top 

universities and this is because they’re legacies or the kids of 

donors.   Legacies are three times more likely than general 

population to be admitted at Harvard and two and a half more 

times at Yale and over half of legacies are admitted at Dartmouth 

and Penn.   Now turning to Asian-Americans, foes of affirmative 

action as I said love to use as a poster child for who would benefit 

if affirmative action ended and this is just not true.  First of all, 

Asians have voted decisively in favor of affirmative action, in both 

California and Michigan when these policies were challenged.   

And, now, it’s true that some Asian-American students have done 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 27. 

 

 

 

remarkably well in higher education, and these are 

disproportionately the children  of highly-educated professionals, 

who immigrated here predominantly from, um, East Asia and 

South Asia starting with the change in immigration laws in the 

1960s.   But there are other Asian-American students that face 

considerable educational barriers.  In particular Southeast 

Asians, who are the children of refugees who fled here after the 

Vietnam war, from Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam.   I do a lot of 

my work in Lowell, Massachusetts, which is the second-largest 

Cambodian enclave in the country.  A third of Lowell’s 

schoolchildren are Asian, predominantly Cambodian.  But, 45 

percent, a disproportionate number of Lowell’s school—of Lowell’s 

dropouts and students who are dismissed for sev—severe truancy 

are Asian-American.  Almost one in two Hmong, and the Hmong 

are, um, an ethnic group that hails from Laos, and over one in 

four Cambodians in the United States have had no formal 

schooling whatsoever.   In the affirmative action plans endorsed 

by the United States Supreme Court and the University of 

Michigan cases, you can consider a broad array of, of diversity 

factors, of which being—coming from a family of Southeast Asian 

refugees, can count.   Proposition 209 ended affirmative action in 

California in 1996.  Coincidentally this was the same year that I 

graduated from Boalt Hall School of Law, and as an aside, it was 

the diversity at Boalt, which was—Boalt was very diverse at the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 28. 

 

 

 

time—that in part inspired me to be a civil-rights lawyer.  And 

after—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One.    

KHIN MAI AUNG 

—after affirmative action ended, diversity within the Asian-

American population has suffered at—at most selective University 

of California schools.   At Boalt Hall School of Law, there were 

more than four times as may Filipinos, and—with affirmative 

action than without, and overall the number of Asian-Americans 

has dropped by 1 percent at all UC law schools in the first three 

years without affirmative action.   Whites on the other hand 

increased by 12 percent.  At UC Berkeley undergrad, a study by 

the Southeast Asia Resource Action Center found less than 50 

total Cambodian [sic], that’s far less than 1 percent, fif—less than 

50 total Cambodian and Lao, at UC-Berkeley in 1993.   And the 

case for affirmative action in employment is even clearer for 

Asian-Americans, there’s less than 1 percent of partners in major 

law firms are Asian-American and less than 1 percent of senior 

managers at Fortune 1000 and Fortune 500 firms.   That’s very 

similar to the weights of representation for blacks and Latinos, 

but of white men are 97 percent of senior partners, of senior 

management, at Fortune 1000 and Fortune 100 [sic] firms, even 

though they’re only—    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 29. 

 

 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Khin Mai Aung—   

KHIN MAI AUNG 

—43 percent of the workplace—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Thank you very much—   

KHIN MAI AUNG 

—of the workforce, thank you very much—    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

—for that, opening statement.  [APPLAUSE]  Thank you.  Uh, 

before we—now before we hear from Terence Pell and later, uh, 

Kim Crenshaw, I have—I have a couple of quick questions, uh, 

for panelists who, who have spoken already or a couple of them, 

first I’d just like to ask, uh, uh, Joseph Phillips, I’ll ask you—   

How do you answer the argument that was made by, uh, among 

others General Norman Schwarzkopf in the amicus brief in the 

Michigan case, that the military needs, for reasons of, of morale 

and, uh, national security it needs black and Hispanic officers,  

and to have an professional number of senior black and Hispanic 

officers, one of the tools is affirmative action.  Uh, is that a reason 

for which you would say…okay, I’d, I’d prefer that result than 

whatever other result might emerge from color-blindness in the 

process—    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 30. 

 

 

 

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

No, I would answer him, uh, with the words of Colin Powell.  Who 

in talking about affirmative action, talked about color-blindness.  

Uh, and, and, um, I can’t remember the exact quote but what 

Colin Powell says, is that if you’re talking about, um…removing 

barriers, if you’re talking about non-discrimination…so that, uh, 

then, then he’s all for it, I’m all for it, everyone here is for it.   If 

you’re talking about putting people, uh, in places of, of, uh…over, 

over the, uh…not the ruling of men, but, you know…office, 

officers over groups of men, who, uh, are not qualified, that is not 

what Colin Powell endorses and I’m positive, that that is not 

what, uh, Norman Schwarzkopf—    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

And so in being selected for some program that might lead one to 

advancement, that selection process should be absolutely color-

blind, not, not look to make sure you’re sending up a couple of 

minority candidates up for the, with the group, regardless of, uh, 

of, of, of metrics.   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

No, of course not, I think that that, uh, that that clearly 

undermines the confidence that you need to have, uh, in a 

fighting unit.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Okay.  Uh, Tim Wise, I have a—a brief question for you.  If race-



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 31. 

 

 

 

conscious…uh, policies of the government have created the, uh, 

the inequities…   

TIM WISE 

Right—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

—that you’ve cited, and you feel that race-conscious policies are 

justified in redressing them—    

TIM WISE 

Right.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

—uh, how far would you go, what about race-conscious tax 

policies, why don’t we have, uh, refundable tax credits for 

members of minorities and you and I can play, uh, the alternative 

male-whiteness tax, we pay the A—   

TIM WISE 

Right—right—  [LAUGHTER]    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

—AMWT, and that way we can go right to the end result of the 

unfair competition and redress it.   

TIM WISE 

Right.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Or—or do you draw the line at color-blindness—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 32. 

 

 

 

TIM WISE 

No, I—I would—look, the example you give I wouldn’t endorse but 

I would endorse the government of the United States, and those 

corporations and their existing entities that stem from other 

entities in past generations—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Mmm.   

TIM WISE 

—that profited from and made possible the institutionalizing of 

white [UNCLEAR] and white preference—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

But why not an extra exemption for [UNCLEAR] minorities—   

TIM WISE 

I would say—I wouldn’t do it in tax policy, I would, I believe, and 

we can come back and debate the issue of substantive repair and 

restoration and reparation some other time.  We’re not here to 

debate it tonight, I would support the government doing that, I’m 

not saying, white folks should take our checkbook and have a 

line item for black people.  You know, but, but I would suggest 

that the government, which made possible the institutionalization 

of this systemic inequality, has an obligation to rectify it by many 

means of which affirmative action is one.   It’s not the only one, 

and it may very well not be the best one.  But it’s one and it’s the 

one we’re here to discuss tonight—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 33. 

 

 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

All right—   

TIM WISE 

—and to get rid of it won’t bring us to any of the other, possibly 

better options that we could discuss at a—at a later time—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Okay, more discussion to come, thank you, uh, Tim, and, and, 

uh, more opening statements, uh, first from Terence Pell 

speaking, uh, for the motion, “It’s time to end affirmative action.”    

TERENCE PELL 

Uh, thank you.  Uh, look, for the last 40 years America’s been 

engaged in a massive social experiment, to see whether the use of 

racial preferences could bring about the full integration of 

American soci—society.  The question tonight is whether these 

preferential policies can deliver on that promise.  And the 

question need not be abstract nor need it divide liberals and 

conservatives.  That’s because in the last decade, a growing body 

of data has become available, that helps us get a handle on the 

trade-off between attending an elite institution, on the basis of 

different admissions standards, or attending a less prestigious 

institution.   Let’s start with the effect of racial preferences, uh, in 

undergraduate colleges.  I’m going to focus on one specific 

academic area, namely science.  Not many minority students 

enter science, and many who do drop out along the way.   Blacks 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 34. 

 

 

 

receive about 5.3 percent of the bachelor’s degrees in science, 

despite making up about 9 percent of the college enrollment.  

Well research into these disparities by Dartmouth psychologist 

Rogers Elliot, provides a template of the kinds of questions we 

should be asking not just in the area of science, but in every 

area, where preferential policies are employed.   Because it turns 

out that the preferences themselves, are part of the problem.  The 

first thing that Elliot’s data does, is dispel the assumption that 

non-Asian minority students somehow aren’t interested in 

science.   In fact, high-achieving black and Hispanic high school 

seniors, are more interested in majoring in science, than whites.  

The second thing the data tells us is that the really elite research 

universities, the schools that recruit the most promising 

students, black and white, use significant racial preferences to 

enroll the most gifted and talented black and—black and 

Hispanic undergraduates.  Elliot’s nineteen ninety-sev—1997 

study, fo—which focused on four Ivy League schools, found that 

the mean SAT math score for black students was 100 points 

below that of white students.  That difference was about 1.6 

times this—sorry, 1.6 standard deviations of the white scores.   

This means that the black mean was not only below the white 

mean, it was so far below the white mean that the majority of 

black students had scores in the bottom 10 percent of the 

distribution of scores of all students.   Now right away this 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 35. 

 

 

 

significant use of race preferences by the most elite schools is 

significant.  The fact that the very top schools, that have their 

pick of the best students, are using preferences of this 

magnitude, suggests that the next tier of schools are likely using 

greater preferences, and in fact, second-tier schools do use 

greater preferences, about 15 percent larger than those used by 

the top schools.   As a consequence, many black and Hispanic 

students up and down the line are attending schools where their 

credentials are significantly out of line with those of their, uh, 

classmates.  Well one possible response at this point, and we 

may hear this later on tonight, is to say that the SAT math score 

doesn’t fairly measure black academic success.   One could even 

deny that admitting black students with lower SAT math scores 

amounts to a preference.  Well, we could debate this all night, 

but the research on this point is undisputed.  If anything grades 

and SAT scores over-predict black performance.   So admitting 

blacks and Hispanics with significantly lower test scores and 

grades make it all but certain that blacks and Hispanics as a 

group, will get lower grades as—in college, and that’s just what 

Elliot found.  Blacks interested in science at these schools had 

grades almost a full GPA lower than whites.   For many students, 

many minority students this made it difficult to continue in 

science, and Elliot found that only a third of the blacks who 

started in science, at elite schools, uh, completed a degree in 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 36. 

 

 

 

science.  The rest switched majors, or dropped out altogether.   

Uh, and this rate was twice the rate of white students at those 

schools.  Second, uh, the lower grades of those who did finish 

disadvantaged them significantly both in going on to graduate 

school, and getting jobs.   Well, if the story ended here you might 

think that test-score gaps make it highly unlikely that blacks will 

ever, or a significant number of blacks will ever succeed in 

science.  Uh, this would be a very dreary conclusion if it were 

true but the fact is, it’s not true.   This is where the data tells us 

something very interesting, it helps us get a handle on the real 

problem with preferential policies, because it turns out that the 

absolute value of a students math SAT score and high school 

grades, is less important, as the relative difference between one’s 

credentials, and those of his or her classmates.   How do we 

know this.  Well, it turns out that black students interested in 

science, who attend schools where their math SAT scores more 

closely match that of other students, persist in science at much 

higher rates, even though the average SAT scores at these 

schools is lower.   So for example, Howard University, a 

historically black college, has average SAT math scores of about 

450, well below the mean of the, at the, the, uh, SAT score, at the 

elite schools we’ve been discussing, yet Howard is the top 

producer of black undergraduate science and engineering 

degrees in the country.   What’s more, a large percentage of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 37. 

 

 

 

undergraduate science majors at Howard and other historically 

black colleges, go on to get Ph.D.’s in science.  Of the top 21 

undergraduate producers of black Ph.D.’s in the country, 17 of 

them, 17 of the 21, are historically black colleges, and none are 

among the 30 or so most selective schools that routinely recruit 

the most talented black high school students.  And so what we 

have is this perverse system.  The institutions with the poorest 

track records for producing black Ph.D.’s in science, are getting 

the best minority students, and then, driving them out of science 

at twice the rate of white students.   And the institutions with the 

best track record, are getting the middling students, and then, 

producing the overwhelming majority of black Ph.D.’s in science.  

Well what lessons can we draw from this.  First, the existence of 

racial inequalities in society which nobody on this side of the 

table denies, is not a sufficient justification for preferential 

policies.   It’s bad enough that African-Americans are so 

substantially underrepresented in science.  It’s completely 

inexcusable that racial preferences end up frustrating and 

discouraging the gifted black high school seniors who say they 

want to study science.   Second, it is misleading to evaluate racial 

preferences in the abstract, as if we’re talking about one—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 38. 

 

 

 

TERENCE PELL 

—or two institutions that use preferences in a handful of 

deserving cases.  What we’re dealing with, the problem that we’ve 

got, is the systematic use of racial preferences by every single 

institution of higher education in the country.   I’ve used my time 

to focus on one specific problem in some detail, but a growing 

body of research shows similar effects in many other areas.  

Surely all of us can agree, that schools should be required to 

publish graduation rates and grade distributions, and yes, 

persistence in majors, broken down according to the different 

preferences granted,  and that means all of them, including racial 

preferences, alumni preferences and athletic preferences, the 

problem is the same in all cases.  But more fundamentally, we 

need to ask ourselves why we tolerate the systematic use of race 

preferences.   Every Supreme Court precedent in this area’s held 

that racial preferences are a last resort.  Yet schools continue to 

treat preferences—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Thank you—   

TERENCE PELL 

—as a sacred cow—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

—Terence Pell—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 39. 

 

 

 

TERENCE PELL 

—they must defend to the death.  Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Thank you…Terence Pell, uh, speaking in favor of the motion, 

now, uh, to give the last of the opening statements against the 

motion, “It’s time to end affirmative action,” Kimberlé Crenshaw.   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

Hi.  I’m Kim, and I am a beneficiary of affirmative action.  Despite 

what our opponents want you to think, Americans continue to 

support African-American for women and for people of color.  

When the precise question of eliminating affirmative action was 

put to voters in Houston, Texas, the majority repudiated this 

radical agenda.   In supporting affirmative action Americans 

inherently know that while it is one thing to pull down those “No 

trespass” signs, it is another task altogether, to build pathways to 

and through our institutions, that are genuinely and visibly open 

to all.   This continuing support of affirmative action is even more 

remarkable, given how the media, and lukewarm supporters, 

have acquiesced to the terms of the debate that have been set by 

well-funded, think tank-produced critics.   Think for just a 

moment about what is missing in the way that affirmative action 

is usually framed.  The debate is usually premised on the 

metaphor of an equal-opportunity race, where we all began at the 

starting line.  The societal rewards go to the swiftest and the most 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 40. 

 

 

 

talented.   Now the problem with affirmative action as we are led 

to believe, is that it distorts the race by giving some people a head 

start, halfway around the track.  So when the winner is a woman, 

or a person of color, or for goodness sakes, a woman of color, 

supposedly we all know that it isn’t because she was the swiftest 

runner, or thinker, or planner, but because of the head start that 

she happened to get.   Now, some supporters of affirmative action 

will agree that the runner got a head start, but will justify the 

head start in terms of a diverse society.  Now, don’t get me wrong, 

I’m all for diversity, it’s the language of inclusion used by the 

military, by corporate America, virtually all colleges and 

universities and yes, by the Supreme Court too.   These are good 

allies to have on our side and on this one, they’re firmly with us.  

But while all sides of this debate focus on the disabilities of the 

runner, they wind up missing entirely the crippling conditions of 

the track.  So what if instead of training our gaze at the runner, 

we looked instead at the conditions of the track.   What if we 

really looked at the different lanes that America’s runners have to 

run in.  If we looked at that we see that some of those lanes are 

nicely paved, even surfaces, beautifully well-lit with freshly 

painted lines.  Other Americans though have to navigate lanes 

that are riddled with obstacles and debris,  where to stay in the 

race they have to climb walls, scale barriers, cross over craters, 

avoid detours, and confront a host of conditions that others never 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 41. 

 

 

 

face, just in order to even see the finish line.  Affirmative action is 

quite simply a commitment to remove the effects of these 

obstacles that impede the race for some, using a wide variety of 

tactics and strategies,  now, the other side will riddle us with 

language about, um, preferences— they’ll talk about racial 

preferences, they won’t talk about gender preferences—as a way 

to get you to forget what you know about the track, and to focus 

instead of what you think you know about the runners.   Now, 

there’s a wealth of information that gives content to the obstacles, 

that run a full gamut from traditional discrimination 

employment, where blacks with a high school diploma, actually, 

actually lose out in the competition to whites with a criminal 

record.   And where the same resume…  receives 50 percent 

fewer white, uh, call-backs than black-sounding names do.  To 

underfunded schools, school districts with the highest 

concentration of black students receive the lowest share of 

resources, and the prison to, uh, the school-to-prison pipeline 

where kids as young as six are handcuffed, and set on a fast 

track to prison, rather than a highway to college.   To hyper-

segregation that isolates minorities from key social networks 

through which most job-seekers actually find employment, to 

newer evidence about stereotype threat that makes gifted 

students unperfor—underperform on high-stakes tests, to 

implicit bias that unconsciously shapes people’s attitudes, and 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 42. 

 

 

 

their behaviors towards minorities.   That makes cops think they 

see a gun instead of a wallet.  That makes teachers think they 

see an imbecile instead of a hungry child.  That makes men think 

they see a ball-busting diva rather than a high-performing 

managerThat makes high-per—highway patrollers think that they 

see traffickers transporting drugs rather than a high school 

basketball team celebrating a nail-clinching [sic] victory.   This 

evidence from disciplines as diverse as sociology, economics, law, 

com—cognitive science, reflects just the barest summary of the 

conditions that are out there.  Modest efforts to build bridges and 

patches over these obstacles, are not preferences.  They are 

corrections to ensure equal opportunity.   Now, to be sure, there 

are preferences that are up there.  And they are dangerous and 

obsolete, I’m talking about the preferences for wealth, for 

legacies, for power, for social networking, preferences that permit 

this privileged and lucky cohort to simply show up at the race to 

win, they don’t have to run, they don’t have to work hard, no one 

scolds them or their families or their communities about 

discipline, and they don’t have to break a sweat.  Let’s take the 

guy up there on the people mover.   Through his family’s money, 

his daddy’s connections, a bunch of good old boy backers, a 

society trained to look the other way, this guy can get a C average 

at Yale, enjoy a [sic] undistinguished record at Harvard B School 

and in due course simply lean over to the finish line, to receive 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 43. 

 

 

 

the most coveted job in the country.   If there is a poster boy 

against real preferences, who better than George Bush.  But now, 

how is it that this colossal preference that attends to the privilege 

is overlooked, I call it, look, it’s a black-man strategy.  Look at 

this, check this out.   Now.  This cover appeared on Newsweek 

during the controversy over affirmative action at the University of 

Michigan, “Affirmative Action—10 Ways to Think About it Now.”  

Now, let’s think about this picture for a minute, what are at least 

three ways that we’re told we’re supposed to think about 

affirmative action.  It’s important for you to know that Newsweek 

was communicating a message here.   This person wasn’t a 

student involved in Michigan, he was a model, he was 

photographed, many times with various attire, to arrive at the 

picture that showed the message that Newsweek wanted you to 

know.   As Janine Jacks reported in her study of affirmative 

action, “Media coverage routinely focuses on race not gender, on 

blacks not other people of color, on elites not people of color from 

all classes and genders.”  White women are the single largest 

group to benefit from these—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One.    

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

—programs, as recorded by the labor statistics, but you certainly 

wouldn’t know it, from the way the media covered it.  What does 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 44. 

 

 

 

this tell you about the nature of the debate when in fact the real 

picture of affirmative action, looks a little bit more like this.  

[PAUSE]  Well, what it’s supposed to tell you, is that affirmative 

action is in fact about people of color of all races, and it’s 

supposed to tell you that it’s actually about women as well.   So I 

submit, that people of good will should recoil from the bait-and-

switch tactic.  They should recoil from any kind of argument that 

frames this solely in terms of racial preference, and solely in 

terms of one group.   I would submit to you that the proposal to 

eliminate affirmative action repudiates King’s call, that day 

standing in front of the statue of Abe Lincoln to make good on its 

promises of fairness, freedom of equality [sic].   It substitutes that 

soaring oratory for a simple three-monkey solution to our 

problems.  We can make it all go away, if we—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Thank you—   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

—agree to see no evil, speak no evil, and hear no evil—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Kimberlé Crenshaw.  Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  Uh, a couple of 

quick questions, uh, for me, uh, before the next part, Terence 

Pell.  Uh, the motion says “It’s time to end affirmative action,” 

that, that leaves open at least the possibility for people on your 

side that there was a time when it wasn’t time…to end affirmative 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 45. 

 

 

 

action.   Was there a period, when confronted with many 

American institutions, uh, that were, uh, overtly segregationist, 

that excluded people, was there a time when it was appropriate to 

have affirmative action or would you say never.    

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

Uh—ooh.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

No, this is for Terence Pell.  [LAUGHTER]    

TERENCE PELL 

Uh, clearly, uh, institutions that operated in completely 

segregated systems had to do something more than, uh, remove 

the, uh, fact of segregation itself, they had to take affirmative 

steps to break down the barriers that they themselves had 

created.   That was the original idea of affirmative action and it 

made sense then.  But since then it’s grown into, uh, the 

systematic use of preferences all over the place and that’s just a 

completely—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

But—   

TERENCE PELL 

—different…use—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

But you’re describing cases of de facto segregation, if there was a 

very small population of minorities there would be a case 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 46. 

 

 

 

there…for—    

TERENCE PELL 

No, I’m talking about particular institutions, for example—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One particular institutional—   

TERENCE PELL 

Yes—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

—segregators—   

TERENCE PELL 

To remedy their own discrimination—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Otherwise there’s never been a case for affirmative action—   

TERENCE PELL 

That’s what I think, that’s right—    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Okay.  Uh, and, uh, Kim Crenshaw, I have a question for you, uh, 

which is, uh, if it is, if it’s, if it makes good sense, uh, to admit a 

minority applicant to law school, for, for good reason, even 

though that candidate’s test scores and grades, uh, would not 

qualify for admission if, if it were a white applicant,  does it 

equally make sense at the bar exam, where there’s a great 

disparity in success, to say let’s have a lower grade for passing, 

uh, for minority candidates.  It’s different, we see a racial 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 47. 

 

 

 

disparity, why not, what’s the difference between that, and 

qualifying with grades.   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

Well, I think there’s a case to be made that all standardized tests 

are deeply problematic and there’s plenty of cognitive social 

science to suggest that.  So if we’re asking about whether there 

are alternative ways to measure merit, if there are alternative 

ways to measure the predictability of success, I’m all for it.   The 

main point of this argument however is whether we should 

eliminate affirmative action in the admissions of col—in colleges 

and law schools and the reality is—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

But—but your colleague Tim Wise—    

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

Let—let me—let, let me—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

—is not limiting himself to those subjects, yes—    

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

—let me point this out.  The reality is that, what the other side 

will refuse to tell you, is that those tests do not tell you anything 

about the success of minority students and lawyers in the 

profession.   President Bok, President Bowen, guys who were 

president of Harvard and Princeton, proved that the level of 

success for people who were admitted through affirmative action 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 48. 

 

 

 

to higher education and law school in particular, are as 

successful if—if not more.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

But just define—   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

Notwithstanding the [UNCLEAR]—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

—the contours of the argument, my, my, my bar exam question.  

That’s different?    

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

I’m not saying it’s different, I’m saying that the proposal that 

you’re asking right now, is whether we should eliminate 

affirmative action.  If we wanna talk about other ways to 

minimize the discrepancies and to minimize the other kinds of 

discriminatory effects on other standardized tests, I’m all for us—  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

You’re open—  

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

—talking about that.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Okay.  Well, uh, I’m now going to announce the, uh, the results 

of our pre-debate audience vote first of all.  Uh, you voted before 

the debaters began, the panelists began debating, and the results 

were as follows.  34 percent of you, uh, voted in favor of the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 49. 

 

 

 

motion, “It’s time to end affirmative action.”  44 percent voted 

against, and 22 percent, uh, were undecided.   And again, at the 

conclusion of the debate we’ll, we’ll poll you, uh…a second time.  

Uh, to begin the discussion portion of our evening,  we’re gonna 

try something different, I’d like to ask each of our panelists, uh, 

to pose a question to someone on the opposing side.   Joseph 

Phillips first, you’re in favor of the motion, a question from you 

for Tim Wise who’s against it.  And you’ll have about one minute 

to answer that question, or you’ll have exactly one minute to 

answer that question—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

Okay.  Make the actor go first.  [LAUGHTER]  Gonna be 

protesting outside of here.  Um, I have two questions…   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Well, let’s have one question, it’s, uh—  [LAUGHTER]  It’s hard 

enough to answer one question—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

I’m trying to choose—  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

—in 60 seconds—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

—which one, we’ll, I’ll ask this one.  I’d like to know, uh, I, I 

listened to Tim’s speech, and, um…I, I, I…  I thought, um…and 

wanted to know why is it that, uh, that blacks, or that you seem 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 50. 

 

 

 

to think that blacks can only achieve, when the playing field is 

level.    

TIM WISE 

Well, I don’t say that black folks can only achieve when the 

playing field is level, I’m making a moral argument, that the 

playing field should be level because for it not to be, is an 

injustice, I’m talking about it from an ethical perspective.   I 

happen to think people of—you know, Madame C.J. Walker was 

the first black millionaire, and she made it in 1911 when 67 

black folks got lynched, but I don’t think we would say, well hey, 

if Madame C.J. could make it, you know, all y’all could’ve made 

it.   Because she was selling beauty products to black women 

that white folks didn’t wanna make, good for her.  But no one in 

their right mind would’ve said, see, everybody should go  out 

there and work so I think folks can succeed, the question is what 

are our obligations as a society to create a level playing field, has 

nothing to do with what the outcome can or cannot be.   It has to 

do with what is right and what is just and what is proper, and I 

would guess, just a guess, that when people have equal 

opportunity, they are indeed more likely to succeed.  I’m pretty 

willing to stand on that this evening.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

And, uh…  [APPLAUSE]  Tim Wise, uh, opponent of the, of the 

resolution “It’s time to end affirmative action,” why don’t you pose 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 51. 

 

 

 

a question to John McWhorter who supports that rotion [sic]—

that motion—   

TIM WISE 

Sure thing, um, John, you suggest that, people of color are 

potentially less qualified as evidenced by their college 

performance, maybe should go less selective schools as a result.  

So given that what would—what should we conclude, the people 

in the audience and, and those of us up here…  from the data 

which suggests that men, on average, also receive far lower 

college grades than women, of all races and ethnicities.  Does 

that mean that men are unqualified for the slots that they receive 

in colleges and law schools, and that maybe they should lower 

their sights to second- and third-tier schools and leave the best 

slots and opportunities for all the women.  And if it doesn’t mean 

that, why doesn’t it mean that, given your argument about race.  

[APPLAUSE]  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

John McWhorter, your answer.   

JOHN McWHORTER 

Tim, I’m not sure that you’re aware of the degree of the 

discrepancies that I’m talking about.  I mean we’ve long known 

about those particular gender discrepancies, and if we’re gonna 

talk about a kind of mindless bean-counting, then no, I’m not in 

favor of that kind of address of racial preferences,  but when 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 52. 

 

 

 

you’re dealing with schools which before a ban on preferences 

have a stark, two-tiered system, where black students are 

crashing and burning at much faster rates, then I think that in 

terms of arguing about—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

30 seconds.   

JOHN McWHORTER 

—morality, and how we address the past, and how we help 

people cope, with a nation where I don’t think that the playing 

field could ever possibly be perfectly level, that, there is an issue 

for talking about racial preferences rather than what you’re 

talking about.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

And, uh, John McWhorter, why don’t you pose a question to, uh, 

Khin Mai Aung who is a su—uh, an opponent of the, of the 

motion.    

JOHN McWHORTER 

Khin, I would just ask you this.  If, um…when there are racial-

preference policies, at least in universities, one unpleasant by-

product can be a sense among a certain group that a certain level 

of performance is just the highest that one does because that’s 

just ethnically authentic, this is something that I saw when I 

taught at UC Berkeley.   A very smart young woman during the 

ban on racial preferences told me that she—she was an 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 53. 

 

 

 

undergraduate working in the recruiting office—was discouraging 

black applicants from coming to UC Berkeley if they made really 

high SAT scores and had really good grades.   And I asked her 

why and she said, in all seriousness, we’re afraid that black 

students who perform at that high a level, aren’t going to have a 

social commitment to the black community at Berkeley.  In other 

words—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Is there a question, to—   

JOHN McWHORTER 

—high achievers—  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

—Khin Mai Aung—   

JOHN McWHORTER 

—are not really black.  How would you respond to that in terms 

of your support for racial preference policies—   

KHIN MAI AUNG 

I’m sorry, could you clarify the question, there was a long—   

JOHN McWHORTER 

How do you—  Okay, how would you respond to the point, that, if 

standards are lowered for a particular group over a long period of 

time, after a while that may be the best that that group ever does 

because they’ve never been asked to do better.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 54. 

 

 

 

KHIN MAI AUNG 

Well first of all, standards are not lowered.  Diversity is a—a 

genuine benefit, that occurs at an institution, both for the 

beneficiary and for other students at that institution.  Secondly, 

beneficiaries of affirmative action are qualified.   Students with 

very low test scores are never gonna get in, unless they happen to 

be legacies or children of donors.  All beneficiaries of affirmative 

action have test scores, and, and, and other criteria where they 

are, are able to succeed and they do succeed.  In the— this 1998 

study by the two—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

30 seconds.    

KHIN MAI AUNG 

—presidents of the university that, um, Kim Crenshaw 

mentioned, The, The, uh, Shape of the River, it found that, black 

students at the most prestigious institutions actually graduated 

at a higher rate than, than black students at less selective 

institutions.   They had very similar career arcs once they 

graduated.  They had the same rate of getting advanced degrees, 

and they were actually more likely than whites to get, um, uh, 

advanced degrees in law, medicine, and business, so I would say 

that, they are qualified and they are succeeding.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

And your question now, uh, Khin Mai Aung, uh, who, uh, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 55. 

 

 

 

opposed the motion, put a question to Terence Pell who argues in 

favor of it.    

KHIN MAI AUNG 

All right, I too am trying to decide between two questions, so, the 

question I’m gonna ask, actually, it’s not, um, related to your 

part comments today.  But, um, I understand that, um, the 

organization that you work for, the Center for Individual Rights, 

has a position that, um, civil rights laws should not apply to the 

private sector.  And so, I’m wondering, is that—why—if you, if 

you’d like to explain that position, I mean, if—   If we were back 

in the ‘60s where, when, uh, you know, we had, uh, black 

students trying to be served at lunch counters, um, in the South, 

would you, would you be standing behind the students or would 

you be standing behind the, um, the diners.  

TERENCE PELL 

Well—  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Terence Pell.    

TERENCE PELL 

Yes, well, the simple answer is that’s not our position and it never 

has been our position, we routinely rely on these civil rights laws, 

like Section 1981, and Title 6 in our lawsuits.  Those laws are 

primarily directed towards discrimination by private entities, uh, 

and private individuals, so,  uh, our organization, uh, not only, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 56. 

 

 

 

uh, is not attacking those laws, we’re using those laws and we 

fully support the use of those laws and the various investigative 

agencies to go after, uh, identifiable acts of discrimination—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

30 seconds.   

TERENCE PELL 

—by individuals and private entities, so, the premise of your 

question, uh, is false.   

KHIN MAI AUNG 

I—I take it I can’t respond to that?   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

You can a—well, there are 20 seconds left, uh—  [LAUGHTER]  

I—I think—I think you’ll be able to get to a little bit later, 

perhaps—   

KHIN MAI AUNG 

Well, I was just gonna say—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

—[INAUDIBLE] from  the audience.   

KHIN MAI AUNG 

My understanding is it was on your website in 2004.    

TERENCE PELL 

Uh, it’s—that’s false.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

That is false, no?   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 57. 

 

 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Uh…in any case, uh, uh—  [LAUGHTER]  Terence Pell, it’s now 

your opportunity to put a question to Kim Crenshaw.   

TERENCE PELL 

Uh…Kimberlé, if it turned out, if the evidence developed and, uh, 

that, uh, race preferences or preferential policies, uh, turn out to 

pose barriers, uh, to minority success, similar to the barriers you 

identified in your talk, uh, would you reconsider your support for 

them.    

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

I would certainly reconsider the actual form, in which affirmative 

action takes place, however I think that most affirmative action 

programs across the country, actually try to attenuate themselves 

to the actual conditions,  so, you all are talking about affirmative 

action, racial preferences as though they are one program, they 

actually function in one kind of way.  When in fact, there are 

hundreds of affirmative action programs, ranging from affirmative 

action in admissions, ranging from outreach programs, 

development programs, information programs—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

30 seconds.   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

All of these forms of affirmative action have been shown to be 

effective for the particular obstacles that they are meant to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 58. 

 

 

 

overcome.  The issue that I see, is that for the most part when we 

see various failures to perform, we tend to focus on the 

individuals rather than saying this is a wake-up call to our 

institutions.  Our institutions know how to integrate equally, do 

they know how to educate equally, that’s the question that is 

raised.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Thank you.  Uh, Kimberlé Crenshaw, uh, speaking and 

answering of that question, she is one of our panelists opposed to 

the motion.  We have lots of time for your questions, for members 

of the audience right now.  And I’d like to call on you, uh, please, 

uh, I’d ask you—I’m sorry.  Excuse me.  I got away ahead of 

myself.  I got one minute ahead of myself.  Kimberlé Crenshaw, 

it’s your turn to put a question to Joseph Phillips.    

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

So Joseph, I—I wanna clarify what I think is a confusion 

particularly in Colin Powell’s position but I also see it as a 

confusion that I’ve heard a lot, coming from the other side on 

Martin Luther King, about what is affirmative action and what is 

a preference.   Is it your understanding that Colin Powell does not 

support affirmative action, to put it more specifically, that he 

believes that promotions the armed forces should be absolutely 

color-blind?  Because that is decidedly not what he says.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 59. 

 

 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Joseph Phillips?   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

It’s my position, that, uh…affirmative action, in the form of racial 

non-discrimination, is a good thing, it’s good for America, that’s 

what Colin Powell says.  Racial preferences, uh, are not a good 

thing, and I don’t believe that that’s what Colin Powell says—   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

So are you saying affirmative action is a racial preference and 

Colin Powell agrees with you on that—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

No, that’s—I said in my—    

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

Okay.  That’s what I wanna know—    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

We’re down to a factual question, when Powell spoke at the ’96 

Republican convention, he didn’t defend affirmative action in 

that…in that speech?   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

You’re asking me to go back—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

I—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

—I’m go—but—  You know, you, you take one speech that 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 60. 

 

 

 

someone made and they may have said other things at, at other 

times during other, uh, conversations.  So I don’t know what he 

said during that, uh, particular speech—   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

It’s in his book.  It’s in his book.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Okay.  Uh, well—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

And I think that I, I…uh, accurately reflected his sentiments—   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

The—the only—the only point is if you’re gonna use people to 

support your position, you should be—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

I think I accurately—   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

—you should be actually clear, that that’s their position—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

Now wait a minute—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

End of panelist question time—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

—I haven’t heard from you exactly what he said—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

End of panelist question time—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 61. 

 

 

 

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

—I’ve heard you tell me that I was wrong, I didn’t hear the quote.    

AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Read the book.   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

Read the book—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

I did the read—  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

All right, let’s—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

Do you have the quote?  Or are you just yelling out from the 

audience—   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

The quote—the quote can be found at www.aapf.org—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

In other words you don’t have the quote—   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

“13 Myths About Affirmative Action”—   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

—you’re just free to say I’m wrong—   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

That’s—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 62. 

 

 

 

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

—without having—    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Enough—enough on Colin Powell’s book.  [LAUGHTER]   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

Go read it.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

And, uh, I’m sorry, uh, to have, uh, jumped the gun a moment 

ago, and for the benefit of my radio producer I’ll repeat what I 

said.  We have lots of time left for your questions, uh, from the 

audience, uh, to your panelists, I’d like you to wait until, uh, I’d 

like you to, to raise your hand if you’d like to ask a question, 

someone with a microphone will find you.   Uh, when that person 

does and I call on you, would you please, uh, stand up, and, uh, 

keep your question, if you can please keep your question brief 

and, uh, to the point, do, do as I say, not as I  do.   And, uh… 

and then we’ll take—we’ll start by taking a question at a time, 

here’s a gentleman here.  Sir, you’re right there.    

AUDIENCE MEMBER 

 [PAUSE]  Thank you very much.  Uh, Booker T. Washington if 

I’m correct opposed legislative mandates to address racism, as 

did Barry Goldwater who was anything but a racist contrary to 

popular belief.  I’d like to ask any of the panelists on either side, 

to what extent from a philosophical and constitutional 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 63. 

 

 

 

perspective, either of those two gentlemen were right or wrong 

and why.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Uh, Kimberlé Crenshaw, you’re the—you’re the law professor, I’ll 

turn to you first.    

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

Well, it’s not surprising that there have been African-Americans 

throughout history who have disagreed, sometimes profoundly, 

um, with the positions of the majority of African-Americans as to 

what kind of intervention should be put forward to better their 

condition.  It’s important to recognize in this context that every 

significant program that has ever been introduced to assist 

African-Americans to actually achieve freedom and equality has 

been denounced as a preference, from the Emancipation 

Proclamation, which was seen as giving them a preference, giving 

them something that they didn't deserve, which was basically the 

value of their labor; to anti-discrimination law that would protect 

them in their rights to, um, access to hotels and theaters, was 

seen as special treatment; to even the argument against 

segregation, which was seen as a preference.  So, the point of the 

matter is, we have to always see these against the base line in 

society.  If we consider the base line to be unfair, if we see the 

normal status quo as discriminatory, then these interventions are 

not seen as preferences, they're seen as equal opportunity.  If, by 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 64. 

 

 

 

contrast, we see society is basically benign, or we think it’s OK 

that there are these deep structural differences that won't go 

away by ignoring it, but we think that’s perfectly acceptable, then 

we’ll understand these interventions as being preferential.  I 

happen to be on the former side of the case.  I think having 

structured inequality over centuries is inconsistent with the 

deepest values of America, and therefore any kind of intervention 

that is intending to try to bring about real equality is not 

preferential, it’s in the deepest traditions of equality.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

And does anybody on the side supporting the motion want to, 

want to respond, either to directly address that question, or to 

respond to— 

JOHN MCWHORTER 

Booker T. Washington— 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

John McWhorter.  

JOHN MCWHORTER 

…knew a very different world than ours, and I personally would 

not be in favor of his particular view that people really should 

just pick themselves up, and that’s all.  Really, people do need 

help.  He never knew the New Deal, he never knew the Great 

Society, he never knew Affirmative Action when it was first 

instituted, which I personally think was a very important thing 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 65. 

 

 

 

given the situation in the country at the time.  However, his basic 

insight that there does come a point when, in order to cope with 

an imperfect world, you have to do it yourself.  There comes a 

point, is one that I think is valuable.  One reads his writings now, 

and they're not nearly as reactionary and foreign as one would 

think.  I think it’s an advance in our society that we do have a 

safety net, that we do have things to, for example, help the poor.  

For me, socio-economic preference makes perfect sense.  The 

issue, simply, is that today there is not nearly as large an overlap 

between disadvantage and having black skin as there was in 

1960 or even 1970— 

ROBERT SIEGEL  

So, so when you argue it’s time— 

JOHN MCWHORTER 

It’s time for a revision.  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

When you argue it’s time to end Affirmative Action, you would 

say, this time is different from an earlier time— 

JOHN MCWHORTER 

It was about fifteen years ago— 

ROBERT SIEGEL  

[OVERLAPPING VOICES] …became time to end Affirmative 

Action.  Uh…   

[INAUDIBLE VOICE]  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 66. 

 

 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Oh, you have the microphone?   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Yeah— 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Can you, yes…  And, and if, members of the press, if you're here 

asking questions, could you please identify yourselves.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Hi, I have a question on set, on this test, uh, I had my, uh, 

undergrad studies back in China, science major, I moved on to 

law and business, but a lot of my classmates went on pursuing 

Ph.D.’s, and they did, and actually I did that too, we did a GRE 

test preparation.  And I remember the time, you know, didn't 

have money, could not afford, um, materials from the test center, 

so all we can prepare on is based on, you know, the past ten 

years old exams in the public.  Or, you know, even those things 

are not always readily available.  You know, I’d remember times 

I’d have to get oil prints of those [UNCLEAR].  So, but the funny 

thing is, these guys all went into very high level Ph.D. programs, 

and in GRE tests, uh, people out there didn't have so much 

preparation materials.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

You have to come to the question now— 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 67. 

 

 

 

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Actually beat, actually beat US people, you know, US test, 

become the best performing student body, the Chinese guys.  

And if a, if foreigners can do that, why people in the US cannot?   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Uh, if foreigners can compete with American students on the 

tests that we require them to take for admission to our graduate 

schools, uh, why shouldn't we expect Americans to do so?  Who, 

who wants to answer that, that question?  Tim Wise?  

TIME WISE 

I don’t think it’s a question of whether we ought to expect people 

to do well on tests.  I think we ought to.  And I think we ought to 

make it possible for folks to do so no matter who’s taking it, 

whether they are taking it from some other country, whether 

they're taking it from down the block.  I think the real question, 

however, is whether or not we ought to be looking at that test, no 

matter how it’s done on, by anyone, be they a foreigner, or be 

they someone who is a citizen of the United States, as to whether 

that should be the criteria for admission.  Now, the research on 

this is very clear, that the highest correlation you ever will get on 

an SAT, a GRE, an MCAT, an LSAT, or any of these tests, with 

actual performance in the first year after the test is taken is point 

four.  That’s fairly pathetic in statistical terms, because what it 

means is that, at most, sixteen percent of the difference between 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 68. 

 

 

 

any two students can be explained or predicted by that score, 

meaning eighty-four percent has nothing to do with it.  Why are 

we using merit criteria that don’t really measure merit, but do 

typically, not always, but over-represent those that have those 

resources, and those who are affluent.  Not only, there are folks 

who don't have the resources who sometimes do well, but that’s 

the highest correlation.  It seems to me that we ought to be 

looking at alternative criteria, including things like testing, but 

not overemphasizing those, because we know that in fact when 

those students who scored lower, who maybe didn't score as well 

as those at the very pinnacle get in at places like the University of 

California, that only about five percent of their grade differences 

can be predicted by the test scores.  So, they're not being 

mismatched, they're not unqualified, there are other things that 

recommend them for the spot.  So, we ought to expect and try to 

make sure everyone does well.  We also ought to have a criteria 

that is both more fair and representative, but also more accurate.  

It doesn’t serve anyone’s interests to use a criteria that does not, 

in fact, predict success, and those tests simply do not.  In fact, 

one study of law schools, talking about law schools, University of 

Michigan study found that there was an inverse relationship 

between LSAT score and future professional success.  Meaning 

that those who did better actually did worse and weren't as 

happy in their jobs when they got out of law school and started 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 69. 

 

 

 

practicing.  So by that criteria, we ought o let all the folks in who 

bombed the LSAT, because they're going to make the best 

lawyers.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Next question from the audience.  

KHIN MAI AUNG 

Can I just add something to that as well?  I mean, part of it is 

also you said that these foreigners were able to prep, which I 

would imagine means that they speak English and perhaps are 

from a professional background, that they, they knew about 

these tests.  And I think that that is, that is a big issue, that, that 

the access to the materials and access to information about the 

tests also isn't equally available.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Next question.  

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Uh, good, good evening.  Each of the panelists against the motion 

insists that the beneficiaries of Affirmative Action have been as 

successful as any other students in school.  If that’s the case, 

should the children of those beneficiaries, and the grandchildren 

of those beneficiaries, since it’s been forty years, should they 

continue to get the preferences, uh, afforded by affirmative 

action, and if, if it’s not time to end it now, when is the time to 

end it? 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 70. 

 

 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Kim Crenshaw? 

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

You know, one of the fallacies in this argument is the assumption 

that socio-economic disadvantage has completely wiped out the 

ongoing reality of race disadvantage.  Or, to put it another way, 

people think that when we’re talking about the black middle 

class, we’re talking about the same thing as the white middle 

class.  People think that sons and daughters of people with a 

college diploma are going to have the same kind of life 

circumstances as sons and daughters of white people with, with 

diplomas.  Nothing could be further from the truth.  If anything, 

the most significant difference between African-Americans who 

are middle class and whites who are middle class, is the ten 

times wealth difference between one and the other.  Let me put it 

another way.  Whites who have basically the same income, still 

have between eight to ten times more wealth.  Now, why is that 

important?  Wealth is associated with everything that makes you 

competitive.  It puts you in communities where you have the 

better schools.  It puts you in health care situations where you 

have better care.  It puts you in social networks where you hear 

more about what material you need to know, what opportunities 

are available for you.  So the reality is that there is a lifetime of 

difference— 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 71. 

 

 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

But, but return to the question— 

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

…between being, between being— 

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Let’s narrow the question, doctors and lawyers, doctors and 

lawyers who have benefited from these programs, why should 

their children be beneficiaries of the same program— 

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

And my, and my answer is, why shouldn't they be?  What do we 

have to know about the lives of African-American middle class to 

come to the conclusion that perhaps one generation ago they 

were socio-economically disadvantaged, but this generation 

they're not?  In every major statistical finding about the actual 

life circumstances of African-Americans, there are still a range of 

disadvantages that they face.  Now, is it going to be the same 

level of Affirmative Action as someone who is, um, truly, uh, 

impoverished?  Of course not.  But most Affirmative Action 

programs don’t function that way.  They give you benefits for both 

being socially, economically disadvantaged, and race as well.  The 

point is, race still marks life of African-Americans.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Any comments on this from the— 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 72. 

 

 

 

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

Disadvantage— 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Joseph Phillips.  

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

Range of disadvantage, disadvantages, uh, do not come with a 

black face.  Uh, and this is why earlier I said, we need to talk 

about people, because when we start talking in these broad 

terms, we’re talking about the black middle class, I happen to live 

in Los Angeles, down the street from Calabasas [PH], California, 

which is one of the wealthiest communities in America.  I coach 

football, and I have black kids on my team with parents who 

make more money than most, half of everybody in here added up 

together.  THE idea that, that these children are in need of 

preferences because they don’t have access, uh ,to, to the same, 

uh, benefits that their white counterparts, is just ridiculous.  

Because we’re not talking about individuals suddenly, we’re 

talking about people, um, generally, in term of their race.  I also 

want to go back to, to address something else that was said, this 

idea of, of this testing.  Look, right now, these are the tests that 

we’re using, and I want you to listen very closely, what we’re 

talking about, oh, the tests, uh, not the preparation, and on and 

on and this…  The underlying message is that our kids can't 

compete, that my three sons cannot compete.  And I don’t buy it.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 73. 

 

 

 

JOHN MCWHORTER 

Well, that’s— 

JOSEPH PHILLIPS  

If we want to get rid of these tests, then let’s get rid of them.  

Whatever standard we use, the standard should be applied 

equally to all kids— 

JOHN MCWHORTER 

Robert?   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

That's what we’re saying here.   

JOHN MCWHORTER 

Could I…?  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Briefly from John McWhorter, and then a reply, perhaps, from 

the, uh… [APPLAUSE] …the opponents.  John McWhorter?   

JOHN MCWHORTER 

I think that one thing that we are leaving out of the discussion, 

and you have to bring it in, is that much of the reason that, uh, 

middle class black kids have trouble with submitting the same 

kind of file as a white kid would have, is a tendency among black 

teens to say that it is white to do well in school.  There’s a myth 

nowadays, there is a myth nowadays that that has been 

disproven.  And I’d like to try to be as pacific as possible here, 

pacific is the word I'm using, but here I can't, that’s a myth.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 74. 

 

 

 

There are many studies, I’ve looked at all of them in detail, all of 

them show, even when they don’t think they're showing it, that 

there is a strong tendency for black kids to tease each other that 

way. There are reasons for it.  But, the question is, how does, 

how do racial preference programs address that particular 

problem, which I think is addressable, and is being addressed by 

things that go on before kids go to college? We can't just leave 

that out of the discussion because the data is inconvenient, and I 

think it’s absolutely crucial to the things that we’re talking about.   

TIM WISE 

Robert?  

ROBERT SIEGEL  

That’s John McWhorter, and we’ve heard several points made by 

the supporters of the motion, so to the opponents, and Tim Wise, 

yes?   

TIM WISE 

I just, responding to the last thing John said, I think it’s 

interesting that he’s upset about, supposedly, ostensibly, middle 

class black kids saying that it’s white to be smart, and somehow 

that’s their pathology, and that’s the problem we should address.  

It’s an issue, we could discuss it at a different time.  What I find 

interesting about it is that you, John, are affiliated with the 

Manhattan Institute, which has received money from the Bradley 

Foundation, hundreds of thousands of dollars.  This is a 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 75. 

 

 

 

foundation that paid Charles Murray to write The Bell Curve, 

which is a book that doesn’t imply that black people are inferior, 

it screams it from forty percent of its pages.  So, when you say 

that black folks say being smart or doing well in school is acting 

white, the book, The Bell Curve, funded by the same people that 

fund the organization you work for, basically says the same 

thing, it says high IQ is white, or perhaps Asian, and black folks 

are genetically defective.  I find it disingenuous for you to put the 

burden of that on black children, and not the very wealthy, well-

heeled, well-funded white folks who actually print material that 

says black people are defective.  And not one prominent 

conservative in this country, including the three of you, said 

anything public when The Bell Curve came out, not one word, not 

one prominent conservative.  Let’s place our attention on those 

who actually say that white people are smarter, and black people 

are inferior, and you won't hear that from any of this.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

John McWhorter?  

[APPLAUSE]  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

John McWhorter, quick reply, then we’ll get another question.  

Yes?   

JOHN MCWHORTER 

Sir, when The Bell Curve came out, I was very young, I had no 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 76. 

 

 

 

public presence, I was studying linguistics, and so I don’t know 

what I would have said.  To the extent that Bradley funded that 

book, which I frankly did not know, and that they fund some 

work that the Manhattan Institute does, that’s certainly true.  

Charles Murray has nothing to do with the Manhattan Institute, 

and stopped, as a matter of fact, while he was writing that book.  

And what I'm funded for doing at the Manhattan Institute is 

things like working on prisoner re-entry programs, et cetera.  But 

what’s important is that when I talk about the “acting white” 

phenomenon, I'm not saying that it’s a pathology, I'm not blaming 

the black kids for this, this is something that happened as the 

result of a sequence of socio-historical things that ultimately 

have their root in racism.  Nevertheless, it is there today, and I 

don’t think that it can be denied.  And the issue is to treat it, and 

to show black kids that there are different ways to think along 

those lines.  

ROBERT SIEGEL  

OK, well enough about those other institutions, and uh…  

[APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Back to questions from the audience.  Sir?   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Yes, thank you.  Um, let’s say that it’s irrelevant what Harvard 

and Yale do as private institutions, and I don’t care if they're 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 77. 

 

 

 

one, two-headed people, it doesn’t mean anything.  We’re in 

New York City, the home of City University, a great publicly 

supported institution, supported by all the tax payers of New 

York City, the sons of cops and transit workers, teachers, retail 

people, garment salesmen, everybody.  A publicly supported 

institution, so that when you have racial preferences, you are 

discriminating against taxpayers.  You are discriminating not 

against George Bush, not against the legacy kids, not against 

that.  Taxpayers either have a right to have equal opportunity 

for their tax money to be used for their own purposes, that is 

to get their kids in school, or taxpayers ought to be denied that 

in favor of race and ethnic preferences.  Justify your position, 

those of you who are against the motion, to the taxpayers of 

New York City when they want to send their kids to higher 

education.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

OK, a distinction between public, taxpayer-funded, and private 

institutions.  Time Wise?   

TIM WISE 

Sure.  City College used to have open admissions, because it 

recognized that its purpose was to serve all the citizens of the city 

of New York, and it did that for a while.  A lot of white folks who 

wouldn't have passed any test actually went to City College under 

the era of open admissions.  And yet, when all the sudden people 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 78. 

 

 

 

of color began to, quote, unquote, flood, being the metaphor we 

often use, uh, that hallowed institution of higher learning, then 

all the sudden we started talking about standards, and criteria, 

and remediation, and these people aren't really qualified.  I think 

what taxpayers ought to expect is open access and ability to get 

into institutions they pay for.  Because to get rid of Affirmative 

Action at City College or any public institution is to say that 

people of color who pay taxes should not expect representation 

for the taxes that they pay.  And the same is true in contracting, 

and the same is true in public employment.  I think City College 

ought to have open admissions, it worked really well for a lot of 

white folks for decades, and I think it’s a really good idea for 

students of color as well.   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

And let me just add a, a— 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Kim Crenshaw.  

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

…a one point to the way that this convenience has done exactly 

what I have suggested that it would.  When this proposal was put 

on the table, it’s talking about eliminating all Affirmative Action.  

It's not talking about eliminating just Affirmative Action that 

benefits African-Americans.  It’s not talking about eliminating 

Affirmative Action in higher education.  It’s talking about 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 79. 

 

 

 

eliminating Affirmative Action in contracting, in employment, in 

education, that applies not just to African-Americans, but white 

women, and people of color as well.  Let me, let me point out 

what difference it makes to have this convenience focus on 

African-Americans.  Would any of this make sense if we were 

talking about white women?  Would we actually say, well, you 

know, it turns out that the, uh, scores for white women actually 

over-predict their performance in law schools, because when they 

actually get to law schools, even though they're equally qualified, 

if you take these test scores as meaning qualification, they end 

up not scoring nearly as well as white men.  Would we even 

suggest that?  No, we would think that there is something going 

on in law school that actually has the effect of suppressing their 

performance.  Would we talk about women’s cultural values?  

Would we talk about their work ethic?  Would we talk about any 

of these things if we were talking about white women?  No.  

Would we talk about any of these things if we were talking about 

Asian-Americans, or even Latinos?  So, the reality is that we’re 

actually trying to attack a wide variety of programs by having a 

debate that’s as old as this Republic about the intellectual 

inferiority of African-Americans.  I would submit that you should 

repudiate this proposition just because it’s not talking about the 

full range of Affirmative Action and the beneficiaries who are 

stake in this conversation.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 80. 

 

 

 

[APPLAUSE]  

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Another question from the audience.   

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Given, this is a question for the people who are, who are for the 

motion.  My first question is whether or not you agree that 

integrated educational settings, whether it be in K through 12 or 

higher education, are important.  And then secondly, given the 

pervasive and serious inequalities that we see in K through 12 

education by race, what it is that you propose to do to try and 

open up the pathways to those institutions?   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Which of the supporters of the, of the motion— 

TERENCE PELL 

I mean, I, look, I agree.  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Terence Pell.  

TERENCE PELL 

I think that, uh, there’s real value to integrated education, there’s 

value to diversity, but that’s really not what this debate is about.  

This debate is about one’s means used to achieve integration, one 

means used to achieve diversity.  And the way it’s been used to 

achieve diversity is highly mechanical, and imposes a lot of costs 

on, uh, African-American students in particular.  And what we’re 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 81. 

 

 

 

saying is, you’ve got to look at those costs, you can't just sweep 

them off the table with this, you know, with rhetoric about the 

value of diversity.  We all agree diversity is important.  What we 

disagree about is the means used to achieve the, that diversity— 

ROBERT SIEGEL  

But is it, is it so important, that, that, indeed, if you came into a 

class, if you were teaching, and saw that, uh, all but one student 

in, in the room, everyone else is white, would you say, we should 

be doing something?  Is it so important that we should go revisit 

other values we’re pursuing here, given the results I’m seeing?  

Or not quite that important— 

TERENCE PELL 

I, I'm…  Go ahead.   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

I was going to say, I'm glad you put that up, because I'm not 

convinced that diversity is all that important, uh, diversity in 

terms of skin color.  I think that when we go to school, the people 

that we befriend, the people in our neighborhoods that, uh, that 

we hang out with, are people that we share values with.  When 

you talk to college students, and people have been to college, and 

what was most important about their college experience, it had to 

do not with the color of the person sitting next to them, but the 

values of, of the teachers, and those kinds of things.  [APPLAUSE]  

Um, of course, I, you know, integration is a great thing.  Uh, I'm 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 82. 

 

 

 

for that.  I'm for it when people want to do it.  Um, am I, am I for 

people manipulating and forcing people?  I don’t think that that’s 

a good thing, I don’t think that that’s, uh, I don’t think that that’s 

good for America at all. And I also want to make this point: uh, 

we talk about how great diversity is, and yet, the schools, who 

great diversity is for the educational benefits for our students, 

and yet the schools that are routinely churning out the greatest 

number of black doctors, the greatest number of black lawyers, 

are HBCU’s, which are not racially integrated at all: Morehouse, 

Spellman, Howard, et cetera.  Ninety-eight, ninety-nine percent 

black.  That is not, in my opinion, a bad thing.  And if it is, then 

Tim, maybe we should make sure that we get a critical mass of 

white girls down at Spellman, and uh, be, be on our way— 

JOHN MCWHORTER 

Robert, can I interject something quickly— 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

HBCU being Historically Black Colleges and Universities.  

JOHN MCWHORTER 

Just real quick.  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One very brief statement, and then if somebody wants to make a 

very brief statement from the other side, and then on to closing 

statements.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 83. 

 

 

 

JOHN MCWHORTER 

I think we have to be very careful with the words integration and 

segregation, as they happen to have drifted into certain 

implications in our time.  Because often the way we’re using the 

word segregation today implies something I'm very uncomfortable 

with, which is that the only way that black people can really excel 

is if white people are around, and I'm not comfortable with that.  

And so we talk about schools, and for me, a dominant image is, 

for example, Kip Academies, where all the kids are black or 

brown and poor, and they're being taught very well by dedicated 

teachers, and there are new Kip Academies every year.  And 

somehow, on the other hand, especially in academia, it seems 

that we’re supposed to keep talking about increasing segregation, 

as if segregation now is always the same thing as it was forty 

years ago, when actually a whole lot of black kids, poor black 

kids in a room together can learn very well.  That excites me.  It 

is peculiar to me how unexciting that seems to be found by a lot 

of— 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

I agreed to, I agreed to a brief statement— 

JOHN MCWHORTER 

That, thank you, that was it, that was it.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

And one rebuttal, if you want to make it, form the side opposing 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 84. 

 

 

 

the resolution.   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

Well, I guess the only thing that I'm— 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

Kim Crenshaw.  

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

I want to point out to people in, in listening to this, is that this 

anti-Affirmative Action argument is really a Trojan Horse for a 

whole range of anti-integration, anti-civil rights, anti-equality 

policies.  You’ve heard it, the bottom line is, this whole Brown 

versus Board of Education experiment, this whole idea of forced 

integration was a bad idea when it started, and it’s a bad idea 

now.  So what this is, is a roll back.  It’s not just about racial 

preferences, whatever you define that to be.  It’s about what kind 

of society we really want to have.  And this other side is happy to 

have societies, to have institutions that are racially separated, to 

have communities that do not interact with each other, and have 

all white institutions, all black institutions, and all Asians.  

That’s a roll back on the basic— 

JOHN MCWHORTER 

That’s a distortion—   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

…promise of the civil rights movement.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 85. 

 

 

 

JOHN MCWHORTER 

That’s a distortion— 

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Well, you’ll all have closing arguments in which to address— 

JOHN MCWHORTER 

I don’t think that that’s what I said— 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

…some of what you believe are the misconceptions you’ve heard 

about the other side.  Uh, the final remarks from the panelists, 

uh, are two minutes a piece.  At one minute I’ll say one, as, I’ll be 

as loud as I can in saying that, and then, uh, after that we’ll get 

to vote on who won the debate.  First of all, closing statement, 

two minutes against the motion, Tim Wise.  You can do it from 

your, these we can give from the desks, yes.  

TIM WISE 

Great.  Um, couple things.  First of all, just to address something 

I think that was frankly disingenuous that was said by Terence 

Pell earlier, he said that his organization does not advocate no, 

uh, discrimination laws applying to the private sector.  In May of 

2004 I got on their web site, I was writing my book on Affirmative 

Action, it’s footnoted in my book, their statement of principles 

included the following: the Center for Individual Rights believes 

in the limited application of civil rights law and the right of 

private individuals to deal with others as they see fit. I'm not sure 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 86. 

 

 

 

what that’s supposed to mean other than Woolworth’s gets to 

say, black folks don’t sit here, and cab companies don’t have to 

give rides.  That’s what it suggests, that’s what it suggests.  And 

you don’t have to like that that’s what it suggests, but that was 

what it said.  Secondly, everyone up here on that side has said 

that Affirmative Action was legitimate in the old days, because of 

the existence of persistent racial discrimination.  They’ve all 

acknowledged it.  Which means we’re not debating a principle 

here tonight of color blindness in all cases, what we’re debating is 

the issue of facts on the ground.  

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One.   

TIM WISE 

If the facts on the ground say that discrimination is still a 

significant problem, then by definition, by their own admission, 

the debate is over, and you have to vote for us.  That’s not a 

debate trick, that's basically what they're saying.  The only side 

that has presented any information at all tonight, let alone 

analysis, as to the existence of ongoing discrimination, is this 

side of the aisle, which means all of the things I said at the 

outset, about employment, about contracting, about education, 

an ongoing white racial preference has been utterly dismissed.  If 

that still exists, their own standard of evaluation says that they 

lose and that we win.  So just make sure you remember that 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 87. 

 

 

 

when you punch those little buttons. [LAUGHTER]  The bottom 

line, and I'm going to quote, since I didn't get to ready my Reagan 

quote, I'm going to do this.  I promise, if you cut me off, it’s, it’s it, 

it’s the quote.  Ronald Reagan, when he was Governor of 

California, 1974, last thing he did as he left office was sign into 

law the Affirmative Action programs, and here’s what he said.  He 

said, time and experience have shown that laws of anti-

discrimination are not enough, justice demands that each and 

every citizen consciously adopt a commitment— 

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Time!   

TIM WISE 

…to Affirmative action— 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

And again— 

TIM WISE 

…so as to make equal opportunity a reality.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

You’ve run out of time.  

TIM WISE 

Reagan was right, and they're wrong.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Thank you, Tim Wise, uh, for those closing remarks.  

[APPLAUSE]  You got your citation of Ronald Reagan in.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 88. 

 

 

 

TIM WISE 

Thank you.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Uh, now, as a closing statement, two minutes for the motion, “It’s 

Time to End Affirmative Action,” from Joseph Phillips.   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS  

If white folks are so racist, if they come out of the womb hating 

black folks, why on earth would we trust them to run Affirmative 

Action programs designed to bolster the education of black 

students?  That's what I heard him say.  So what kind of society 

do we want?  I have a little more faith in the American people 

than I think some folks on the other side do, because I think that 

the American people, they’ve spoken loudly in California, they’ve 

spoken loudly in Michigan and Washington, they will speak 

loudly in Arizona, and Colorado, and other states in the 

upcoming election, that they are in favor of integrated societies.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

One.   

JOSEPH PHILLIPS 

The American people are in favor of equal opportunity.  What 

they want is fairness.  I think it’s quite a compliment that more 

and more people are saying, listen, they're, they're taking the 

words of my mother, and they're saying, listen, there is no 

monopoly on brain power.  Black folks can compete, we want to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 89. 

 

 

 

give them the opportunity, and I think it’s about time.   

[APPLAUSE]  

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Thank you, uh, Joseph Phillips, for that closing statement.  Now 

a closing statement against the motion from Khin Mai Aung.  

KHIN MAI AUNG 

So, in talking about diversity and the benefits of diversity, now 

let, the other side makes it seem like we’re saying, well, you 

know, we want racially diverse classes because if you're black 

you come, you have a certain perspective and you're, you're 

expected to carry the mantle of that experience, same if you're 

Asian or, or white, or so forth…  That, that’s not what we’re 

saying.  There has been mountains of evidence about the benefits 

of a diverse educational environment, and a diverse workplace 

that was produced.  In the University of Michigan cases it was 

produced before the court, and I'm sure that, uh, Mr. Pell’s 

organization fought that with the best arguments that they had, 

and the Supreme Court voted in favor of diversity.  Also, with 

regard to the process that, um, educational institutions use to 

accept students, it’s a very, it’s a very flexible, individualized 

process that, that the type of admissions plan that was endorsed 

by the Supreme Court in the University of Michigan case is 

individualized, there are no quotas, it’s not mechanical.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 90. 

 

 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One.   

KHIN MAI AUNG 

Because Mr. Pell’s organization actually won the case at the 

undergrad institution which, which found that the undergrad, 

um, policy at the time was too mechanical, so it’s a very 

individualized consideration.  And, you know, the, the last thing I 

want to leave you with is, it’s what we call “The Causation 

Fallacy.”  Even if, even without Affirmative Action, whites’ 

chances of admission only gets in, at our most prestigious, it only 

rises at our most prestigious institutions by one to three percent, 

according to that Bowen and Bok study, the one by the, um, the 

University Presidents.  It only rose by one point five percent for 

the average white student.  That’s because there’s a whole lot 

more white students than minority students that are applying.  

So, even without Affirmative Action it’s not going to increase a lot 

of people, it’s not going to increase any, any visual applicant’s 

chances of getting in by a whole lot.  So, this whole, um, you 

know, thing about how every white student hat has been, um, 

admitted, or even every Asian student who, you know, sometimes 

believes that that’s the case, thinks that I would have gotten in if 

it wasn’t about Affirmative Action.  That’s simply not true.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Thank you, Khin Mai Aung, uh, for that closing statement against 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 91. 

 

 

 

the motion. [APPLAUSE] And now a closing statement in favor of 

the motion “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” from John 

McWhorter.  

JOHN MCWHORTER 

I think that when we’re evaluating this debate, a crucial thing to 

realize is that there is no denial on any of our part that there is 

inequality in our society.  This is the crucial point: looking at the 

nation that we’re in, looking at the history of the world, looking at 

the nature of our species, it is logically unclear to me that there 

ever could be a human society where the playing field is 

completely level.  Now, we can work on things, but it’s always 

going to be imperfect, and it’s going to be imperfect enough to 

matter.  You can be committed to social justice while realizing 

that because society cannot be perfect, what our job is, is to 

teach people who didn't come out with as many chips as we 

would have liked, to cope and do the best that they can despite 

the imperfections of the system. Now, somebody is down on the 

bottom, of course, I personally am in favor of there being help, of 

there being relaxation’s of standards, if necessary.  But when this 

is simply a matter of skin color— 

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One.  

JOHN MCWHORTER 

…I think that we have departed from what the original intentions 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 92. 

 

 

 

of these policies were. The issue is not waiting for there to be no 

inequality or discrimination, the idea is, when do you let it go, 

because there’s never going to be a society that’s completely 

without it.  And in closing I would like to say that there is 

evidence pro and con for this, and I don't see on the other side 

any engagement with the con.  There is an understandable sense 

that their arguments are God’s arguments, the only ones worth 

mattering, and that anybody who has different ideas is funded by 

sinister people, or has a different agenda, et cetera., et cetera. 

[LAUGHTER]  It’s not true.  To be honest, I’ve studied their stuff.  

I know the pro.  There are other arguments written by cogent 

people, many of them not conservatives, these people don’t see 

those arguments as worthy of engagement.  Their case, therefore, 

is incomplete.  I think you should vote for us.  [APPLAUSE]  

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Thank you, John McWhorter.  Now, final remarks against the 

motion from Kimberlé Crenshaw.   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

When Affirmative Action was withdrawn at the University of 

California at Berkley, and at UCLA, the participation of African-

Americans and Latinos fell to levels that we haven't seen since 

1968.  When you think about whether you want to vote for this 

proposal, you should think about whether you're satisfied with 

that.  When you think about whether you want to vote for this 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 93. 

 

 

 

proposal, you should think about whether you're satisfied with 

the fact that women contractors lost a thirty-five percent share of 

the contracts that they had had in California as the result of 209.  

When you think about voting for that you need to think about 

women as well as people of color.  Now, the other side says we 

don’t talk about some of this evidence.  Let me tell you something 

I will talk about.  They tell you that students who graduate from 

Spellman, who go to Morehouse, who go to Howard miraculously 

end up doing better than going to the elite institutions that they 

might otherwise have gotten into, they want you to think that the 

reason they do better there is they’re over there where they 

should belong, with all the other black people.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  

One.   

KIMBERLE CRENSHAW 

What they're not telling you is that these institutions have had a 

track record, knowing how to encourage students, educate 

students to create an environment where students feel confident 

to do their best.  So, rather than taking that as an indictment of 

the institutions that have taken qualified students and not 

allowed them to do their best, they follow the track, and the 

proven, uh, tradition of focusing on stereotypes about African-

Americans.  So, my point is, if you're unhappy with the 

inferences that are drawn from this position, if you're not a color-



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 94. 

 

 

 

blind fundamentalist, who is not, like  Condoleezza Rice, who is 

not, then you know that there is still work to be done in this 

society.  You know that this inequality is something that has to 

be addressed, and you know that just like any other social 

problem we care about, like asbestos, it would be silly to think 

we’re going to solve asbestos by being asbestos-blind.  It’s silly to 

think we’re going to solve the problem of race by being color 

blind.  [APPLAUSE]  

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Kimberlé Crenshaw, thank you very much.  Now final remarks 

from Terence Pell, for the motion, “It’s Time to End Affirmative 

Action.”   

TERENCE PELL 

Well, tonight all of us are gathered here to defend the principle of 

equality, and I think we do that with a sense that equality is 

under siege as never before, and that’s because real equality is 

never achieved, it’s always coming into existence.  As our 

opponents say, there’s a lot of work to be done, and that’s true.  

But today, the challenge to equality doesn’t come from the 

political extremes, it comes from really the political middle.  

Moderates have tried to eliminate differences in achievement 

among black and white eighteen year olds by essentially 

engineering an admissions system that makes them go away, and 

with characteristic efficiency those preferences have been 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 95. 

 

 

 

extended to every institution after, uh, undergraduate college, 

including professional schools and public and private 

employment.  Though they aren't intended to do so, these policies 

perpetuate racial differences, and they corrode social bonds.  

They make it difficult for minority high school students to attend 

schools where their credentials would make them academically 

competitive.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 

One.   

TERENCE PELL 

And that’s the point about the, uh, historically black colleges.  

It’s not that blacks ought to go to the HBCU’s, it’s that the white 

schools, the elite schools ought to learn from the way the HBCU’s 

run their admissions programs, they admit on the basis of merit, 

and it makes a big difference.  The most troubling aspect about 

tonight’s debate has been the reaction of our opponents to efforts 

to disclose the problems and end these policies.  Our opponents 

essentially demand that we continue to wink at real differences in 

qualification, and demand also that we remain discreetly silent 

about the predictable consequences of this winking.  It’s time to 

put an end to race preferences, it may have been a good idea at 

one point, but it no longer serves a useful purpose.  There are too 

many other important issues that we need to be talking about if 

we’re going to achieve real equality in our lifetime.  [APPLAUSE]  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 96. 

 

 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL  

Terence Pell, thank you very much.  That concludes the final 

remarks.  It’s now time for you to decide who carried the day.  

Once again, please pick up the keypad that’s attached to the left 

armrest of your seat, and after my prompt, press one if you are 

for the motion, “It’s  Time to End Affirmative Action,” two if you're 

against the motion, and three if you are undecided.  Please cast 

your vote now.  Fine.  I’d like to, uh, thank the debaters and all of 

you in the audience for your good work, uh, and before I 

announce the results of the audience vote I want to take care of a 

few things.  First, the next Intelligence Squared US Debate will be 

on Tuesday December 4th here at Asia Society and Museum.  The 

motion to be debated then is, “Aid to Africa is Doing More Harm 

than Good.”  It will be moderated by WNYC New York public 

radio’s Brian Lehrer, and the panelists for that next debate will 

be, for the motion, economist and president of the Free Africa 

Foundation, George Ayittey, Professor of Economics at New York 

University William Easterly, and writer and policy analyst David 

Rieff. Against the motion, co-founder and former president of 

Africare, C. Payne Lucas, deputy director of the UN Millenium 

Project and associate director of the Earth Institute, John 

McArthur, and Gayle Smith of the Center for American Progress.  

An edited version of tonight’s Intelligence Squared US Debate can 

be heard locally on WNYC AM 820 on Sunday November 25th at 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action” (11/13/07) Page 97. 

 

 

 

8pm.  These debates are also heard on more than eighty NPR 

stations across the country, please check your local NPR member 

stations listings for the dates and times of broadcast outside of 

New York City.  Uh, copies of books by John McWhorter and 

Joseph Phillips are on sale upstairs in the lobby, and you can 

also purchase DVD’s from previous debates here tonight, or from 

the Intelligence Squared US web site.  And now the results.  Uh, 

after the debate, thirty-nine percent of you, uh, favored, were for 

the motion, “It’s Time to End Affirmative Action.”  Uh, against, 

fifty-five percent.  Undecided, six percent.  The team against the 

motion carries the day, with an absolute majority, and a stronger 

increase.  [APPLAUSE] Congratulations, to the team against the 

motion, well done.  And good evening.   

 

[END] 


