
Intelligence Squared U.S. - 1 - 11/14/2014 

November 13, 2014     Ray Padgett | rpadgett@shorefire.com 
       Matt Hanks  | mhanks@shorefire.com 
       Hector Silva  | hsilva@shorefire.com 

Mark Satlof  | msatlof@shorefire.com 
T: 718.522.7171  
  

Intelligence Squared U.S. 
 

Legalize assisted suicide 
 

For the Motion: Peter Singer, Andrew Solomon 
Against the Motion: Ilora Finlay, Daniel Sulmasy 

Moderator: John Donvan 
 
 

AUDIENCE RESULTS 
Before the debate: 
65% FOR 
10% AGAINST 
25% UNDECIDED 
 

 
After the debate: 
67% FOR 
22% AGAINST 
11% UNDECIDED 
 

 
 
Start Time: (18:46:17)  
 
John Donvan: 
So, spontaneous applause moment number one, please, let's welcome Robert 
Rosenkranz to the stage. 
 
[applause] 
 
Robert Rosenkranz: 
Hi, John. 
 
John Donvan: 
Hi, Bob. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
So, Bob, one thing we wanted to clarify, the motion language is very tight.   Three 
words, shorter than we normally have.  It sounds very obvious, but we -- we mean 
something specific when we say, "Legalize assisted suicide," whose meaning could be 
more ambiguous than it sounds. 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 2 - 11/14/2014 

Robert Rosenkranz: 
Well, I think what we mean is legalize physician-assisted suicide. 
 
John Donvan: 
Okay.  We want to be clear about that, because it's not broadly used -- 
 
Robert Rosenkranz: 
So that’s what we’re talking about. 
 
John Donvan: 
And the other thing we were chatting backstage beforehand, a sort of interesting 
perspective that you have on this topic. 
 
18:47:19 
 
You know, you've done a lot of things in your -- you've got -- had a number of careers 
behind you, and you were talking about that, number one, you've been an insurance 
executive, and number two, you've been a lawyer.  And you, looking at this topic, those 
two perspectives gave you kind of interesting insight on this.  So start with the insurance 
executive side of it first. 
 
Robert Rosenkranz: 
Well, our insurance company ensures about 8 percent of the U.S. labor force against 
catastrophic injuries at work.  So, I see a lot of case of people who are really, really 
seriously injured.  I saw one just last week, of somebody who is now a quadriplegic and 
going to be bedridden for the rest of their lives, to 30-year-old who has a life expectancy 
of 30 years.  
 
18:48:12 
 
 And a person like that, who might decide that life is not worth living cannot end it 
except with assistance.  And yet the statute doesn't really cover them.  The statutes at 
least in Oregon and -- and Washington only refer to terminally ill.  So, in some ways, you 
know, the -- the statutory issue is narrower than what I think might be the issues that -- 
that ought to be discussed tonight. 
 
John Donvan: 
And that gets to the lawyer side of your experience.  You went and sat down and read 
the statute, and you came back with some interesting responses. 
 
Robert Rosenkranz: 
Well, the other -- the other thing -- requirement of the statute besides terminal illness is 
that person has to be capable of making a decision.  And that term "capable" is not 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 3 - 11/14/2014 

defined.  And indeed they talk about -- the statute talks about an ability to communicate 
their decision in ways that imply that the person is barely able to communicate at all.  
 
18:49:23 
 
So, you know, maybe just shaking their head or squeezing a hand or blinking an eye or 
something like that, which the implication is that it would be very, very hard to actually 
assess their mental acute or their ability to make these critical decisions.  So, that just 
struck me, as a lawyer, as a pretty troublesome bit of legal draftsmanship in this 
question of who is capable legally of deciding whether to invoke the statute for legally 
assisted suicide. 
 
John Donvan: 
So, what's interesting in this one is there is this clash of principles that runs right into 
practicalities and the practicalities, the details leave all sorts of room for interpretation. 
 
Robert Rosenkranz: 
I mean, the more you think about this, the more complicated it gets.  And it is a very, 
very highly emotional issue for a lot of people, and it's going to touch their lives in very 
profound ways.  
 
18:50:18 
 
 But we're talking about legalizing something, which means passing a statute, and 
therefore you've got to pay some attention to the language of that statute and what the 
limitations are and what the ambiguities are. 
 
John Donvan: 
Well, we do have four debaters who are very, very well versed in this, and they are 
passionate about it, so let's welcome them to the stage.  Ladies and gentlemen, our 
debaters. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you.  And I would just like to invite one more round of applause for Bob 
Rosenkranz for bringing this to us. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Sometime numbers can tell a simple story. 
 
18:51:14 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 4 - 11/14/2014 

 
So, here are some numbers from Oregon which has had a Death with Dignity act since 
1997, allowing individuals with terminal illnesses to get lethal prescriptions from their 
doctors to take their own lives.  In the first 17 years of that program, the number of 
people who actually took their lives when they had the pills: 752.  94 percent were 
Caucasian.  More than half had finished college.  Median age: 71.  Roughly divided 
between men and women.  Some more interesting numbers:  400 people in Oregon got 
the pills but never took them.  And a much larger number asked for the pills but were 
denied, five out of six were denied according to one early study.  So the problem with all 
of these numbers I've just recited is that they actually don't tell a simple story and they 
don't answer the essential question of the rightness and wrongness, the morality, and 
the practicality of what is called "physician-assisted suicide" or sometimes "assisted 
dying," because it's not that obvious.  
 
18:52:14 
 
 And getting at it is really something that will take a good solid debate, so let's have it, 
"Yes," or, "No," to this statement, "Legalize Assisted Suicide," a debate from Intelligence 
Squared U.S.  I'm John Donvan.  We are at the Kaufman Music Center in New York 
City.  We have four superbly qualified debaters, two against two, who will be arguing for 
and against this motion, "Legalize Assisted Suicide."  As always, our debate goes in three 
rounds, and then our live audience here in New York votes to choose the winner, and 
only one side wins.  Our motion, "Legalize Assisted Suicide," and let's meet the team 
arguing for the motion.  Please, ladies and gentlemen, let's welcome Peter Singer. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
And, Peter, you are a professor of bioethics at Princeton.  You have written some classic 
books, "Animal Liberation," "Practical Ethics."  You are often described as -- and wait for 
this -- "the world's most influential living philosopher." 
 
18:53:15 
 
You subscribe to a theory of ethics called, "utilitarianism."  If you could explain that in 
one sentence, what would it be? 
 
[laughter] 
 
Peter Singer: 
Sure, in one sentence, utilitarianism is the view that the right thing to do is the act that 
will have the best consequences, all things considered, of the options open to you. 
 
John Donvan: 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 5 - 11/14/2014 

You nailed it in one sentence. 
 
[laughter] 
 
Peter Singer: 
Thank you. 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Peter Singer.  Did I add -- did I -- did I add an extra syllable -- I said, 
"utilitarianism." 
 
Peter Singer: 
That's correct. 
 
John Donvan: 
That's right? 
 
[talking simultaneously] 
 
John Donvan: 
[inaudible] extra syllable.  And please tell us who your partner is. 
 
Peter Singer: 
My partner is Andrew Solomon.  Andrew's a writer who's written very movingly about 
this issue.  He's also a public speaker.  And if you look at the talks he's given on TED, 
TED.com, you will find that eight million people have viewed them, whereas my talk has 
only been viewed by one million. 
 
John Donvan: 
Ladies and gentlemen -- 
 
[laughter] 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
-- ladies and gentlemen, Andrew Solomon. 
 
18:54:13 
 
Please welcome Andrew Solomon.  Thank you.  Andrew, a lot of your story was just told. 
You are a professor of clinical psychology at Columbia.  You are an award winning 
author of several books, including "Far from the Tree: Parents, Children, and the Search 
for Identity," and "The Noonday Demon."  You have also written about your family's 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 6 - 11/14/2014 

own experience with assisted suicide, and, in an article from 1995, you note that back in 
the '90s no one wanted to hear about it or ask about it, that the subject was completely 
taboo.  Now it's legal in five states and 20 years have gone by, have times changed?  Is 
the subject still taboo? 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
Well, it's somewhat less taboo, but in a society in which people tend to be in denial 
about the reality of mortality altogether, getting them to talk about this is still 
frequently a struggle.  But I think speaking about it openly, as we are doing tonight, is 
one way to help people be less afraid to tell their families or to tell their doctors what 
they actually think and feel. 
 
18:55:16 
 
John Donvan: 
We will be discussing it tonight, thank you, Andrew Solomon. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Our motion is "Legalize Assisted Suicide."  And we have two debaters who will be 
arguing vociferously against this motion.  Please let's welcome Baroness Ilora Finlay. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Baroness Finlay is a member of the House of Lords, and after this she is just "Ilora."  She 
has agreed that while she's here in the former colonies she will drop the honorific. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
She is, more importantly, a palliative care physician.  She is president of the British 
Medical Association, and she comes to this debate with a personal story that she will 
share later on as well.  But she's also, as I said, a member of Britain's House of Lords 
where an assisted suicide bill is being considered.  And, Ilora, doctors everywhere are 
for the most part opposed to these laws, but the majority of the public most 
everywhere support it, how come? 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
Well, I think it's important to remember that doctors know the complexities of trying to 
do assessments as to whether somebody really wants this or not and all the other issues 
that would have already been touched on.  
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 7 - 11/14/2014 

18:56:23 
 
They also know about advances in medicine and that things today are very different. 
Most of the public sees stuff on the media that looks scary.  They're scared about their 
own dying and we're all going to die.  And they also often have memories of things that 
might have happened a quarter of a century ago. 
 
John Donvan: 
I'm going to stop you right there because I think you're getting into your debate 
material. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
Oh, I'm sorry.  I'm just so enthusiastic. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you.  Ilora Finlay. 
 
[applause] 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
Thank you. 
 
John Donvan: 
And tell us, please, who your partner is? 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
I'd like to introduce the kind, caring Dr. Daniel Sulmasy, who has studied this in-depth -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Ladies and gentlemen -- 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
and is a physician. 
 
John Donvan: 
-- ladies and gentlemen, Dr. Daniel Sulmasy.  
 
[applause]  
 
John Donvan: 
And Daniel, you're -- you wear several hats. You're also arguing against the motion, 
"Legalize Assisted Suicide," but you wear several hats. You're a professor of medicine 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 8 - 11/14/2014 

and ethics, and -- at the Department of Medicine and Divinity School at the University of 
Chicago.  
 
18:57:19 
 
You also have been a member of the presidential committee on the study of bioethical 
problems since 2010. You have an MD and a PHD. What we're wondering is, you know, 
with these hats you wear -- medicine, ethics, religion -- do they clash or do they work 
well together? 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
I think, in some ways, what it really means is I have too many bosses. But beyond that, 
they fit together seamlessly for me, really. I mean, doctor, when you think about it, 
means "Teacher." And I try to just be a good teacher for my ethics students, for my 
medical students, and for my patients. 
 
John Donvan: 
Well, we'll be getting some teaching you -- from you tonight, I imagine. Ladies and 
gentlemen, the team arguing against the motion. 
 
 [applause]  
 
John Donvan: 
And those are our four debaters. And to remind you, this is a debate. It's a contest of 
persuasion with ideas, logic. And you, our live audience here in New York, will be serving 
as our judges in picking the winners of this contest. By the time the debate has ended, 
you will have voted twice -- once before the debate and once again after the debate.  
 
18:58:19 
 
And the team whose numbers have moved the most in percentage point terms will be 
declared our winner. So, let's have the preliminary -- the first vote now. If you go to the 
keypads at your seat -- you see a set of numbers on them? Just pay attention to 1, 2, 
and 3. If you agree with this motion at this point, Legalize Assisted Suicide, push number 
1. If you disagree, push number 2. And if you're undecided, push number 3. You can 
ignore the other keys. They are not live. And if you push the wrong one by mistake, just 
correct yourself and the system will lock in your last vote. And we'll lock it out in about 
10 seconds. Okay. It looks like we're good. We're going to move forward. We go in three 
rounds. Let's begin with Round 1. Round 1. Our motion is Legalize Assisted Suicide. Here 
we have opening statements from each debater in turn. They'll be -- they will be seven 
minutes each. And here to make his first opening statement, supporting the motion, 
Legalize Assisted Suicide, Andrew Solomon.  
 
18:59:20 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 9 - 11/14/2014 

 
He is a professor of clinical psychology at Columbia University, author of the book "Far 
from the Tree: Parents, Children, and the Search for Identity." Ladies and gentlemen, 
Andrew Solomon.  
 
[applause] 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
Because much of modern medicine prolongs not living but dying, we need to rethink 
death itself. Making someone die in a way that others approve, but that he feels is 
anathema, is an odious form of tyranny. Aid-in-dying needs to be tightly regulated, as 
any life or death matter does, from driving to surgery. But while no one should be 
pressed into assisted dying, no one should be categorically denied that right. It's about 
dignity. In his dissent in Cruzan, Supreme Court Justice William Brennan said, "An 
ignoble end steeped in decay is abhorrent.  
 
19:00:23  
 
A quiet, proud death, bodily integrity intact, is a matter of extreme confidence.” And it's 
about reassurance. Brittany Maynard, who captured headlines for choosing to end her 
life at the age of 29 at the end of a battle with brain cancer, said, "It has given me peace. 
I do not want to die, but I am dying, and I want to die on my own terms." It's not about 
depression. When hope of recovery is gone, when one achieves relief from physical 
symptoms only at the cost of mental clarity, when – one’s dignity is lost to physical 
deterioration, the wish to end your life may be rational. Now, there are some people 
who find great meaning in those very final stages.  
 
19:01:15  
 
But there are other people who are not interested in finding that meaning. And from a 
non-theological point of view, it can be argued that the meaning people attach to that 
stage of life is an artifact of the human imagination. It's not about suicide. Suicide 
responds to personal disintegration while this precludes it. And it is about the 
limitations of medicine. It's nothing short of medical arrogance to say that palliative care 
and hospice can adequately deal with the end of every life. Hospice, in fact, can impose 
an authoritarian, hard, paternalistic view that the hospice way of dying is the only way, 
and it's rooted in precedent, as John said in the opening, in Oregon, where after 17 
years, only 752 people have died from lethal prescriptions, which is to say .2 percent of 
the people in the state who have died.   
 
19:02:17  
 
As Hillary once hoped for abortion, this is safe, legal and rare, and it has popular 
support. According to a 2013 Gallup Poll, 70 percent of Americans support legalization 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 10 - 11/14/2014 

of physician assistance in dying.  When my mother's friend, Sandy, was dying of cancer, 
my mother visited and saw her in the hospital where she was screaming in pain and so 
heavily medicated that she was unable to recognize the other people in the room.  And 
when she came home, my mother said, "If I ever get to that state of pain, promise that 
one of you will shoot me." My mother was diagnosed with ovarian cancer when she was 
56. And when her first chemotherapy failed, she said that she would submit to another 
round of agonizing treatment only on the condition that someone got her those pills.  
 
19:03:21 
 
By the time of her third chemo, she was in dilapidated health.  She was vomiting.  She 
had a persistent malaise, she had hair loss, she was negotiating surgical adhesions, but 
she also had the pills.  And the agony became unimportant because the symptoms were 
permanent only until she decided that she could take no more, and then she would be 
free, and so the disease was no longer in control of her.  My grieving father, my mother, 
my brother and I talked through the logistics as though a dress rehearsal would exhaust 
some of the pain of the loss in advance.  We planned it together, much as we had once 
planned parties or family vacations or Christmas.  We were liberated by our newly 
clarified emotions, but we were entombed in the loneliness of our illegal collusion.  
 
19:04:22 
 
My mother went to see a gastroenterologist two years after she got sick, who told her 
that she had significant tumors in her intestines and would soon be unable to digest 
food.  She called my brother and me, and she said that it was time.  It was all very much 
as we had planned it.  She said, "The only thing I still fear is this not going 
smoothly."  And she took the antiemetics.  A few nights earlier, my mother and my 
brother had pulled a wishbone, and my mother had won.  And now my brother said to 
her, "What did you wish for?"  And she said, "I wished for this to be over as quickly as 
possible. And I got my wish, I got my wishes so often."  And then she said, "When you 
were children, I wanted my love to make the world a safe place for you. 
 
19:05:19 
 
And my greatest hope is that it will still wrap you up for your whole life."  And she said 
to my father, "I would gladly have given decades of my life to be the one to go first.  For 
30 years, Howard, you have been my life."  And then as her voice slowed with the 
medication, she said, "I'm sad to be going."  But even with this early death, I wouldn't 
want to change my life for any other life in the world.  I have loved completely, and I 
have been completely loved, and I've had such a good time.  I've looked for so many 
things in this life, so many things.  And all the time, paradise was in this room with the 
three of you."  I've seen other deaths, and I remember feeling that they belonged to the 
hospital or the illness or the gun or the catastrophe.  
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 11 - 11/14/2014 

19:06:17 
 
This death was my mother's own.  She was the same person in death that she had been 
in life, and it was her right to choose it over a death like Sandy's, and it should be 
everyone's right.  The words "liberty" and "dignity" are nearly synonymous in death as 
they are in love. 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Andrew Solomon. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Our motion is "Legalize Assisted Suicide." And here to argue against the motion, Daniel 
Sulmasy.  He is Kilbride-Clinton professor of medicine and ethics in the Department of 
Medicine and Divinity School at the University of Chicago.  Ladies and gentlemen, Daniel 
Sulmasy. 
 
[applause] 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
As you heard, I am a physician.  And part of my job is to help people die with dignity and 
in comfort.  But I don't want to help you or your daughter or your uncle to commit 
suicide. 
 
19:07:20 
 
And you shouldn't want me to.  I urge you to oppose physician-assisted suicide, because 
it's bad ethical reasoning, bad medicine and bad policy.  I'm going to concentrate on the 
first of these, and Ilora will take up the other two.  Now we strongly support the right of 
patients to refuse treatments and believe physicians have a duty to treat pain and other 
symptoms even to the point of hastening death.  But empowering physicians to assist 
patients with suicide is quite another matter.  Striking at the heart not just of medical 
ethics, but of ethics itself.  That's because the very idea of interpersonal ethics depends 
upon our mutual recognition of each other's equal independent worth, the value that 
we have simply because we are fellow human beings. 
 
19:08:16 
 
Some would have you believe that mortality -- that morality depends upon equal 
interests, usually defined by preferences, and of advanced utilitarian arguments based 
on that assumption.  But which is more important: people or their preferences?  As 
Aristotle observed, small errors at the beginning of an argument lead to large errors at 
the end.  If interests take preference over the people who have them, then assisting the 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 12 - 11/14/2014 

suicide of a patient who has lost interest in living is certainly something that would be 
morally praise worthy.  But it would also follow that active euthanasia ought to be 
permitted, that the severely demented could be euthanized without their explicit 
consent, even experimented upon.  And it also follows that infanticide ought to be 
permitted for children with congenital illnesses.  Now, many might see these as frightful 
conclusions, but this is not just the slippery slope.  
 
19:09:17 
 
These all follow logically from arguing for assisted suicide on the basis of maximizing our 
individual interests.  So, if you don't believe in euthanizing severely disabled children or 
the demented, you might want to rethink your support for assisted suicide, at least if 
you want to be consistent.  Now, is assisted suicide death with dignity?  The word 
"dignity" has at least two senses.  Proponents, like the one you heard, use the word in 
an attributed sense to denote the value others confer on them or the value they might 
even confer upon themselves.  But there's a deeper, intrinsic sense of dignity.  Human 
dignity ultimately rests not on a person's interests, but on the value of the person 
whose interests they are.  I don't have to ask you what your preferences are to know 
that you have dignity.   
 
19:10:18  
 
 And Martin Luther King says that he learned this from his grandmother who told him, 
"Martin, don't let anybody ever tell you that you're not a somebody." Somebodiness, 
this intrinsic sense of dignity, was at the heart of our civil rights movement.  And the 
message is that it doesn't matter what a person looks like, how productive that person 
might be, how others view that person or even how that person may have come to have 
viewed herself.  What matters is that everybody, black or white, sick or well, is a 
somebody. Now, assisted suicide and euthanasia require us to accept that it is morally 
permissible to act with the specific intention of making a somebody into a nobody, to 
make them dead. Intentions, not just outcomes, matter in ethics.  
 
19:11:22 
 
 Intending that somebody be turned into a nobody violates the fundamental basis of our 
interpersonal ethics, our intrinsic dignity. We live in a society that worships 
independence, youth, and beauty.  Yet we know that illness and aging often bring 
dependence and disfigurement.  The terminally ill, especially, need to be reminded of 
their intrinsic dignity at a time of fierce doubt.  They need to know that their ultimate 
value doesn't depend upon how they look, how productive they are, or their 
independence. You see, assisted suicide flips the default switch.  The question the 
terminally ill hear, even if never spoken, is "You've become a burden for you and for us.  
 
19:12:15 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 13 - 11/14/2014 

  
Why haven't you gotten rid of yourself yet?"  Now, a good utilitarian might think that a 
proper question, even a moral duty, but as a physician who cares for dying patients, I 
am much more fearful of the burden this question imposes on the many who might 
otherwise choose to live, than the modest restriction imposed on a few when assisted 
suicide is illegal.  Assisted suicide should not be necessary.  If it's pain and other 
symptoms you fear, they can almost always be alleviated.  As evidence, consider that 
pain or other symptoms rarely come up as the reasons for assisted suicide.  The top 
reasons are:  fear of being considered a burden and wanting to be in control.  Now, you 
may ask, "Why shouldn't I have this option?" and yet we all realize that society puts 
many restrictions on liberty and for a variety of reasons, to protect others, to promote 
the common good, to safeguard the bases of morality and law. 
 
19:13:23 
 
For example, we don't permit persons to drive drunk or to freely sell themselves into 
slavery.  Paradoxically, in physician assisted suicide and euthanasia, patients turn 
control over to physicians who assess their eligibility and must provide the means.  And, 
further, since death obliterates all liberty, saying that respect for liberty justifies the 
obliteration of liberty actually undermines the value that we place on human 
freedom.  Now, Ilora and I live our lives dedicated to supporting patients and families, to 
listening to patients at the end of life, to relieving suffering, and to valuing them to the 
end. 
 
John Donvan: 
Daniel Sulmasy, I'm sorry your time is up.  Thank you very much. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
That's why you shouldn't vote for assisted suicide. 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you.  Daniel Sulmasy. 
 
19:14:14 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
And a reminder of what's going on, we are halfway through the opening round of this 
Intelligence Squared U.S. Debate.  I'm John Donvan.  We have four debaters, two teams 
of two, arguing it out over this motion, "Legalize Assisted Suicide."  You have heard the 
first two opening statements, and now on to the third.  I'd like to welcome to the lectern 
Peter Singer.  He is -- 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 14 - 11/14/2014 

[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
-- let me just say this, Peter Singer is the Ira W. DeCamp professor of bioethics in the 
University Center for Human Values at Princeton and laureate professor at the 
University of Melbourne.  Ladies and gentlemen, Peter Singer. 
 
[applause] 
 
Peter Singer: 
Thank you.  Let's be clear what we are debating this evening.  It's "Legalize Assisted 
Suicide."  It's not "Put Utilitarianism into Practice," and it's also not anything further to 
do with other areas in which one may or may not think that sometimes death is 
preferable and ought to be provided.   
 
19:15:20  
 
That is not the topic.  You're asked to discuss -- to focus only on this quite narrow 
question.  Now, if you think about that question, we are, of course, influenced by the 
idea that normally death is a bad thing.  We often think of it as the very worst thing that 
can happen to us.  But if we ask ourselves why that should be, "Why is death a bad 
thing?" then we can think that there are a variety of reasons in normal 
circumstances.  For instance, people want to go on living, so death is contrary to that 
very strong wish that people have.  It violates their autonomy.  If somebody else in 
particular kills them, it normally violates their autonomy, which is something that we 
ought to respect.  Secondly, death ends your life, and most of us think of life as a 
positive, as a good thing, fortunately. 
 
19:16:13 
 
So, it prevents you from continuing to live that life that you find worthwhile, that you 
find fulfilling and rich, that brings you happiness and other values.  And, thirdly, death is 
a bad thing for those who love and care for the person who dies.  It's a source of grief to 
them that someone they love dies.  So that's why normally, of course, we should not 
promote death, let alone kill people.  But there are very special circumstances in which 
none of these things apply, and that's what we're talking about tonight.  There are 
circumstances in which the person who is considering death wants to die. That is their 
autonomous choice. So, death is not a violation of their autonomy, or contrary to their 
strongest wishes. But it's in accordance with them, as Andrew described in the case of 
his mother just now.  
 
19:17:15  
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 15 - 11/14/2014 

Secondly, there are cases in which a person has no more valuable life to look forward to, 
valuable by their judgment, not valuable by somebody else's judgment imposing on 
them the idea that their life is still worthwhile, even though they, having thought the 
matter through -- perhaps having thought it through for many years -- again, as in the 
case Andrew described, have decided that life would not be worth living for them under 
some circumstances. And in particular, if they have only a short time to live, as in the 
case of the statutes in Oregon and Washington, and now Vermont as well, then they 
know that they cannot look forward to more years of happiness. And as for the grief 
that those who love them will feel, of course they will feel that grief if they die now. But 
in the cases covered by these statutes, where people are terminally ill and likely to die -- 
two doctors certify that they will die, they have less than six months to live, then the 
family is going to grieve anyway. 
 
19:18:21 
 
And the caring family -- like Andrew and his brother -- will at least feel that the person 
they love got to die at a time of their own choosing. And that's important. Now, in fact, 
this idea that this is sometimes a good thing is recognized by our opponents. Daniel 
Sulmasy just said that sometimes it's justifiable to relieve patients' pain, if you're 
hastening death. It's not the hastening death that they object to, because they 
acknowledge that you can withdraw treatment that would keep patients alive -- 
sometimes would keep patients alive for a long time. It's the intention of ending a 
patient's life that they object to. But we don't have to accept that morality. That's a 
specific morality which Daniel Sulmasy is free to hold, of course. And if he -- as he said at 
the beginning -- would not like you -- to help you end your life, that's entirely up to him. 
Nobody is suggesting he should be compelled to end anyone's life against his 
conscience.  
 
19:19:22  
 
But if a different doctor -- and there are such doctors -- is willing to do that, indeed, 
thinks that that's the best final care that he can give to a patient who he can no longer 
restore to a situation that the patient considers worthwhile, then I don't -- I don't think 
we should be hung up by this idea that something is somehow always a wrongful 
intention, even if in normal circumstances, to aim at someone's death would be a 
wrongful intention. But not in these circumstances. In these circumstances, it may be 
the right intention. Now, I'm sure we're going to hear from probably Ilora Finlay, I guess, 
that there are risks – that this is a dangerous thing -- that it will lead to a slippery slope. 
That argument has been around in this debate for a long time. I think that when I first 
became interested in this question -- which now goes back about 40 years.  
 
19:20:18 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 16 - 11/14/2014 

That that was an argument that you had to treat very seriously and had to give a lot of 
weight to. And I could not be completely sure that it was not justified. But now we have 
much more experience of the legalization of assisted suicide. We have, in the 
Netherlands -- in fact, more than 30 years' experience of the open practice of -- by the 
medical profession, with the support of the Royal Dutch Medical Society -- not against 
the doctors' views -- of that practice. And with its full legalization, about 14 -- about 12 
years ago. And fully supported by the Dutch population, so that although there's been a 
succession of governments -- some conservative, some more liberal, one of them under 
a Roman Catholic prime minister -- they have not ever sought to repeal the legislation. 
And similarly, in Oregon, we now have 17 years of experience, a relatively small number 
of people dying each year. 
 
19:21:16 
 
And as you heard, more of them requesting the prescriptions, but not using them, 
because they want the control. They want to know that they could end their life if they 
want to. So, with that experience, the experience of Belgium as well, which followed the 
Netherlands, its neighbor, and then Luxembourg, and then also Washington -- the state 
of Washington, the neighbor of Oregon, which was watching what was going on there, 
and decided that was a good system that they wanted, and therefore accepted it -- we 
have not seen a slippery slope here. We have, in fact, found that these -- this 
legalization is something endorsed by the populations concerned and supported by it, 
and they want it to continue. Thank you. 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you. Peter Singer.  
 
[applause]  
 
John Donvan: 
Our motion is Legalize Assisted Suicide. And here is our final debater making an opening 
statement against the motion.  Ilora Finlay, she is a leading palliative care physician.  You 
can make your way to the lecturn.  She is president of the British Medical 
Association.  She is a member of the House of Lords.  Ladies and gentlemen, Ilora Finlay. 
 
19:22:17 
 
[applause] 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
Thank you.  I'm a palliative care physician.  For over a quarter of a century, I've looked 
after dying patients, thousands.  I've had countless conversations about death and 
dying, and supported each in what they tell me they need, not some kind of formulaic 
death.  But I've seen despair return to enjoy life in new found, unexpected and 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 17 - 11/14/2014 

treasured ways.  It is through compassion that I see how dangerous it is to license 
doctors to provide lethal drugs.  How much assistance is needed?  Well, euthanasia, as 
practiced in the Netherlands by and large, more than physician-assisted suicide, is the 
injection of lethal drugs.  Here in the U.S., that seems to be reserved for a state 
execution.  It's pretty much the same drugs used.  But let me tell you about someone.   
 
19:23:19  
 
Let me tell you about David, aged 36.  His spinal tumor was causing very difficult pain 
and incipient paraplegia.  His surgeon, oncologist, and family doctor all thought his 
prognosis was three months.  And I was asked to see him only because his doctors 
couldn't give him a lethal injection.  He seemed a very clear-cut case for assisted suicide. 
When I saw him, the distress was palpable.  Their third child was six weeks old.  David 
fitted every criteria of every bit of legislation I have ever seen.  He had a clear, settled 
wish, had mental capacity, was not being coerced and was very, very distressed.  It was 
October.  I thought he'd be dead by Christmas.  So what happened? After some 
persuasion, careful, gentle persuasion, he accepted my input.  And gradually, he lost the 
wish to die.  
 
19:24:20 
 
11 years later, he phoned me.  His lovely wife had pancreatic cancer and was 
dying.  That baby, now 11, sat with his sister, brother, and dad holding his dying mum's 
hand.  Is David an exception?  No.  He illustrates all the problems with proposals for 
assisted suicide.  Let's look briefly at what happens in states which have changed the 
law.  Over 16 years of Oregon's law, assisted suicides have risen four and a half to 
fivefold.  In Washington state, which legalized assisted suicide in 2008, the rate of rise is 
fast deeper; 43 percent in one year alone.  When you normalize physician-assisted 
suicide, the underlying social dynamic changes.  Laws aren't just regulatory instruments.  
 
19:25:18 
 
They send a message.  And the message they send is that if you're terminally ill, ending 
your life is something that you probably ought to think about.  Indeed, in Holland, when 
they changed their law, they thought their figures had plateaued, but they've actually 
doubled.  And in Belgium, the Belgians are quite frank about the fact that they know 
that somewhere around about half are actually happening outside the law.  Changing 
the law isn't simple and straightforward.  So, what are some of the problems?  Well, 
let's look at prognosis.  Prognoses are notoriously inaccurate.  Even the most expert 
have a 50/50 chance of being wrong over life expectancy of six months.  Oregon's law 
requires a prognosis of six months or less, yet two years, nine months from request to 
death has been recorded.  Pathologists tell us that at postmortem, about 1 in 20 are 
found to have died from something different to the condition they were being treated 
for. 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 18 - 11/14/2014 

 
19:26:18 
 
And how real is a settled wish?  40 percent of seriously ill people have some mental 
disturbance often attributed to the illness or anxiety or treatment.  And in 13 to 14 
percent, this is a major, treatable depression.  Yet Oregon's own research shows a 
quarter of those seeking assisted suicide have depression, which is sometimes missed or 
overlooked.  And research into a sample showed one in six of those given lethally -- 
lethal drugs legally supplied actually had an undiagnosed, untreated depression.  The 
researchers themselves said the current practice of Death with Dignity Act may not 
adequately protect all mentally ill patients.  Capacity, it has to be situation-specific, 
decision-specific.  How do you assess capacity commensurate with the biggest decision 
that you could take; that to end your life?  Only 6 percent of Oregon's psychiatrists feel 
confident to do it.  
 
19:27:17 
 
Pressures are harder to pick up than depression.  Coercion can be subtle, the costs of 
care, life insurance about to expire or just caregiver fatigue, the person who picks up 
that their family are stressed and doesn't want to be thought of badly.  After all, most 
parents love their children, but not all children love their parents.  And dignity, research 
has shown that the way that care is delivered enhances or undermines dignity.  Cicely 
Saunders of the hospice movement said, "Dignity is having a sense of personal 
worth."  Yet in Oregon, 40 percent, and in Washington, 61 percent cite concerns of 
being a burden, and 80 percent are concerned at losing their dignity.  Are they being 
made to feel their lives are an inconvenience to be disposed for the sake of others?  And 
what of doctors?  Like it or not, you rely on your doctor.   
 
19:28:17  
 
 For the doctor under pressure, it is all too easy to give into the pressure to 
prescribe.  Doctors must recognize dying, not impose futile treatments and relieve 
distress.  But I do not think they should be licensed to cut off life by weeks, months or 
years.  Remember David?  I saw him last weekend, 23 years on from that first 
referral.  And he said I can tell his story.  He brought up the children alone, fantastically 
well.  But what would have happened if his doctor had been able to accede to his 
request?  It is too dangerous to license doctors to prescribe lethal drugs for 
suicide.  Please vote against this utilitarian motion.  And it is utilitarian. 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Ilora Finlay. 
 
[applause] 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 19 - 11/14/2014 

John Donvan: 
And that concludes round one of this Intelligence Squared U.S. debate where our 
motion is "Legalize Assisted Suicide."  
 
19:29:16 
 
Now we move on to round two.  And round two is where the debaters can address one 
another directly, and they will take questions from you and from me.  Our motion is 
this:  "Legalize Assisted Suicide."  And in our opening statements, we heard one team 
arguing for the motion, Andrew Solomon and Peter Singer, making the case that we 
need to rethink death in this country, that the principal here really is one of choice and 
that if the instruments are available to people who are in the last phases of their life to 
choose the time and the manner of their dying, then that should be their right.  They say 
that in practice, in Oregon and other states, this practice has been demonstrated to be 
safe, legal and rare, and for the medical physician to oppose this is an act of 
arrogance.  The side arguing against the motion, Ilora Finlay and David Sulmasy, they're 
both physicians, by the way, and both want to part of assisted suicide. 
 
19:30:13 
 
They make the argument that to assist in taking somebody's life is to make a somebody 
into a nobody and that that is plainly and morally wrong; that assisted suicide, aid in 
dying, is bad ethical reasoning, bad medicine and bad policy.  They also say that there 
are alternatives to assisted suicide for people who are suffering in life, such as palliative 
care and that our knowledge of death is so full of holes that it should not be something 
that doctors are handing out in the form of a pill.  I want to go to the side that's arguing 
for the motion.  And I want to go to Andrew Solomon who told a very powerful story 
about your mother and about your argument for personal choice.  And I want to ask you 
-- I want to say to you that I believe your opponents are acknowledging the power and 
force of personal choice.  They're just saying that there are other interests that are -- are 
larger and greater than that, that the personal choice that your mother made and that 
today more legally other people are making has social implications that ripple through 
society and affect all of us.   
 
19:31:18  
 
Basically, they're saying that there is no such thing as just a personal choice that affects 
one person, that it's broader than that.  I wonder do you concede that point? 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
Well, I think that actually we send a very dark message to the society at large when we 
say to people that they don't have the right to make these decisions, when we say to 
people that we look at their suffering and their anguish, and we refuse to help or 
support them.  I think that sends a social message.  I think people have a difficult time 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 20 - 11/14/2014 

speaking openly and directly to doctors if they know that what they are discussing is 
illegal, and they don't know what their doctor's legal or ethical position on it is going to 
be. 
 
John Donvan: 
Andrew, can I -- can I stop you there, because to a degree, you made that point in your 
opening statement, and I don't want to suppress that point of view.  But what I'm really 
trying to get at is whether the negative consequences that your opponents are talking 
about, do they exist, are they real, and are they simply outweighed by the interest of  
personal choice, or do they not exist? 
 
19:32:16 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
I think that a shift of this kind always has a range of social consequences, so I cannot say 
that they don't exist at all, but I would say that to me they are vastly outweighed by the 
benefits that are gained. 
 
John Donvan: 
Okay.  And I want to go to the other side and take this to Daniel Sulmasy, the issue of 
personal choice, which I think is very much what your opponents' essential argument is, 
and it's something that obviously we all enjoy and value.  And you're making the 
argument that it's not the only thing that's at stake here.  Can you go on with that? 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
Sure.  Now, I certainly am a supporter of patients' rights.  They have the opportunity to 
refuse all kinds of treatments that we give them.  There's no need, for instance, for your 
mother, Andrew, to have gotten the chemotherapy that she got that was making her 
sick. All those sorts of choices need to be honored and respected.  But it is not the case 
that suicide is simply a self-regarding act. 
 
19:33:13 
 
A psychiatrist at Massachusetts General Hospital, Ned Cassem, says that when a patient 
asks about suicide, he begins to ask them, "In whose closet do you intend to leave your 
skeleton?" 
 
John Donvan: 
Well, [inaudible] not quite -- 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
The sense that it is interpersonal, right, that this is going to be something that is an act 
of communication to other people, it says something in that sense, it is always 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 21 - 11/14/2014 

something that impacts other people, and it can't be considered simply a self-regarding 
act to commit suicide. 
 
John Donvan: 
So, you're saying it's not entirely private, that it also is public -- 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
Correct. 
 
John Donvan: 
-- ways that -- 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
Correct. 
 
John Donvan: 
-- maybe Peter Singer disagrees with.  Peter Singer. 
 
Peter Singer: 
Look, I do disagree with it.  I mean, there's a sense in which none of us is an island and 
every act could be seen as having some ramifications socially.  But this one is one that I 
think has very few.  And I don't think that the implication that if you end your life 
somehow you've left a skeleton in the closet, that seems nonsense to me. 
 
19:34:14 
 
And, after all, you're making a decision, why wouldn't you say the same to the patient 
who says, "I don't want any more treatment"?  You know, you say patients have the 
right to refuse treatment, you say that Andrew's mother didn't need to have the 
chemotherapy, but, you know, why wouldn't you say -- why couldn't the doctor say, 
"Look, this could keep you alive, maybe even you'll live for another 23 years, who 
knows?" like David?  You know, you can't exclude it, but you're quite happy to say to 
people, "You can refuse treatment, you can withdraw burdensome treatment of various 
kinds -- the doctor can do that, you don't have to accept it," so I don't see really there's 
such a big difference in terms of the ramifications here of, in both cases, a patient's 
decision not to do what will prolong their life. 
 
John Donvan: 
Okay, well, I mean, this has to get philosophical to some degree.  And I want to have 
you, Ilora Finlay, take that.  So, what is the difference between a patient asking for pills 
to end his or her life in the last two weeks if it's presumed the last two weeks and asking 
to be taken off life support in presumed the last two weeks, and dies in both cases? 
 
19:35:20 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 22 - 11/14/2014 

Ilora Finlay: 
They are actually completely different decisions.  The person on life support is in a way 
being held in that state some -- to someone with [unintelligible] disease artificially, but 
that disease is progressing.  What you're talking about here is somebody where their 
disease may stop progressing, they may actually get much better and improve, but 
you're making a decision to cut their life off deliberately.  And so they're dying of that 
lethal overdose and they're dying long before they may have died of their disease 
because you just can't tell.  And that's the problem.  If you make a decision in life, you 
must have accurate information.  And what I'm saying is, don't kid yourself that 
information about prognosis is accurate because it isn't. 
 
Peter Singer: 
But why doesn't that apply to a decision to withdraws a ventilator. 
 
19:36:17 
 
John Donvan: 
Peter Singer. 
 
Peter Singer: 
I mean, have you never seen a patient where a doctor said, "I think we should take the 
ventilator away," and the patient actually lived quite a lot longer? 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
That does happen occasionally, yes, but they are dying of their disease.  And you 
shouldn't be giving people treatments that you think are not achieving a benefit 
because they're futile.  So if the person doesn't want to be -- have a treatment, they can 
refuse it. Ventilation is a treatment, and if they decide to refuse it, then they can, and I 
as a doctor must support them.  But that is quite different to me, deliberately assisting 
their suicide because what happens is then you stop actually actively trying to make the 
day in front of you better than it would have otherwise been -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Andrew -- 
 
[talking simultaneously] 
 
 Daniel Sulmasy: 
And even if it's the role [spelled phonetically] -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Let me -- no, let me [unintelligible] Andrew Solomon and then I'll come back to you, 
Daniel. Andrew Solomon. 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 23 - 11/14/2014 

Andrew Solomon: 
Withdrawal of life support equipment requires a much more active role for the 
physician than the prescription of medication that someone can use to bring about the 
end of their own life. 
 
19:37:21 
 
It involves the physical removal of equipment. It usually involves the administration of 
morphine to ease the person through the dying process. There's a great deal that a 
physician has to do. And this idea that somehow, that it's something that is natural, and 
because it's natural, it's okay, and the other thing that is somehow unnatural seems very 
distorted to me. Because -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Daniel. Daniel Sulmasy. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
No, this -- first of all, that's not what we're saying and that's not a reasonable way to 
defend the distinction between killing and allowing to die. I think one way of putting the 
difference, from a moral point of view -- at least from our perspective -- is that 
treatments can be considered and futile and terminated. But patients should not be 
considered futile and terminated. And that's the difference, intentionally, in the 
structure of what we're doing, right? So, if somebody's on a ventilator, right? And I stop 
it, my intention is not that they should be dead.  
 
19:38:16  
 
My intention is that they be discontinued from a treatment that I think is needlessly 
causing suffering, prolonging their dying -- 
 
Male Speaker: 
But you don't decide. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
And I am not -- 
 
Male Speaker: 
They decide. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
-- I have not -- I have not -- no, they decide whether they go on -- or whether they want 
to be on it or not. I respect that. But -- 
 
John Donvan: 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 24 - 11/14/2014 

But -- but -- 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
-- but if they haven't died -- but if they haven't died, I don't say, "I failed. Please let me 
go out and get a pillow to smother them, because my intention has been fulfilled when 
they -- when the treatment has stopped." The paradigm case in this country of 
terminating life-sustaining treatment is the case of Karen Ann Quinlan. What did people 
go to court for? They went to court to discontinue her ventilator. And when -- they were 
surprised -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Daniel -- 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
-- [unintelligible] -- yeah? 
 
John Donvan: 
-- let me stop you and take 15 seconds to remind people of -- of Quinlan’s case in the 
1970s. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
Sure. 
 
John Donvan: 
15 seconds. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
Yes. Karen Ann Quinlan was a young woman in a vegetative state on a ventilator after 
partying and overdosing on drugs. And the courts -- the hospital didn't want to 
discontinue her ventilator without court justification for that.  
 
19:39:22  
 
And what -- the family went to court to do was to say that "We want the right to be able 
to discontinue our ventilator." And I'm totally supportive of that. And that's what they -- 
 
John Donvan: 
[inaudible] -- 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
-- the judge -- the judges decided this is what would happen. And to their surprise, the 
woman began breathing when she was disconnected. But what they did was to 
discontinue a treatment that they thought was futile -- 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 25 - 11/14/2014 

John Donvan: 
Okay. Let me bring it back to Peter Singer. So, what I'm hearing your opponent say, to 
some degree -- and was also made in the opening statement -- is that -- is that we -- 
death remains beyond -- beyond our understanding, fully. And then dying remains fully 
beyond our understanding. And your opponents have come up with several examples of 
cases where individuals would have lived longer. This is just purely the medical, not 
even the ethical question now -- that we don't really know what we're doing, and that 
the odds of killing somebody prematurely are out there. 
 
19:40:17 
 
Peter Singer: 
Look, as Andrew said, you can't say that it will never happen. But is it right to condemn a 
vastly larger number of people to suffer when they don’t want to because there may, 
you know, in one in several thousand cases, perhaps, be somebody like the David and 
Ilora Finlay described? I don't think so. And I would, again, emphasize, I think the case 
that Daniel Sulmasy just brought up, with Karen Quinlan, precisely shows that they are 
making decisions when they withdraw treatment. She lived another nine years. She 
never recovered consciousness and she died without recovering consciousness. In my 
view, that was pretty pointless. But if you believe in intrinsic worth of human life, you 
shouldn't have seen the ventilator as futile, because the ventilator kept her alive -- was 
thought to be keeping her alive. And after it was removed, the feeding tubes were 
keeping her alive. So, was that a good thing? I mean, I don't think it was a good thing, I 
have to say. 
 
19:41:17 
 
 But it certainly shows that the decision about withdrawing treatment is just as much a 
decision that you can get wrong, and you can be dramatically shortening someone's life, 
as the decision that we're talking about. 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
And let me just add that I have interviewed hundreds of people and heard stories of 
thousands more who wanted the option to be able to end their lives. And because they 
had to deal with the system in which what they were doing was illegal, they felt they 
had to do it while they still had enough vitality and enough self-control to take the lethal 
medications that they had been able to obtain. And they, over and over and over and 
over again, die months or sometimes years earlier than they would otherwise be going 
to die because they're afraid that they will lose that capacity. And my own mother said 
she could have lived longer if she hadn't been afraid that those intestinal tumors would 
make it impossible for her to ingest her -- 
 
John Donvan: 
All right. Let's let Ilora Finlay respond.  

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 26 - 11/14/2014 

 
[applause] 
 
19:42:14 
 
John Donvan: 
Ilora Finlay. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
But, Andrew, we're talking about physician-assisted suicide in which the patient has to 
take the medication and -- or the lethal drugs, I would prefer to call them.  And that's 
what they have to do.  So that's not consistent.  What you're arguing for is euthanasia. 
And that's not what we're debating tonight. 
 
John Donvan: 
Make the distinction for us. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
Well, in physician-assisted suicide, the doctor prescribes lethal drugs.  The patient has to 
self-administer. 
 
John Donvan: 
And that's the law in Oregon. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
And that's the law in Oregon.  And they will say, in Oregon, well, if you can't do that, 
then that's too bad.  What you're arguing for is that the doctor injects you with lethal 
drugs because if you can't take them yourself -- 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
I'm arguing no such thing.  My question is whether -- 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
But that's what sounded like. 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
-- the doctor is injecting you.  It's a question of whether you'll get into a hospital within 
which you will not be able to exercise your own volition anymore, because the hospice 
system can be so controlling and you are so tightly monitored that you lose the capacity 
to take those drugs. 
 
19:43:17 
 
Ilora Finlay: 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 27 - 11/14/2014 

Well, why would you have to kill yourself, because you've got a failure with your 
healthcare system?  I would suggest you need to rectify your healthcare system so 
people can make choices and control. 
 
[applause] 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
Excuse me, but the only way to rectify that aspect of the healthcare system would be to 
give people the capacity to take those drugs under supervision of the healthcare system, 
which is precisely what you are opposing. 
 
[applause] 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
No, absolutely not. 
 
John Donvan: 
Ilora, let me just ask you, when you say "your healthcare system," you're saying, "You 
Americans," with your -- 
 
[laughter] 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
I'm afraid I am because I do think that actually in the UK, however much you criticize us, 
we are not providing the degree of futile overtreatment that people here seem to be 
frightened of. 
 
John Donvan: 
We don't criticize you. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
And actually -- actually, we are very careful to have conversations with patients about 
what they want.   
 
19:44:15  
 
And advanced care planning is now becoming a standard part of all care for people who 
have life-limiting illnesses, in terms of what do they want, where do they want to be, 
what treatments do they not want and so on.  So, those discussions are happening a 
long time before the situation [unintelligible]. 
 
Male Speaker: 
But you're not denying -- 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 28 - 11/14/2014 

John Donvan: 
Let's let Daniel Sulmasy come in. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
No, I'm just sort of concerned by the kind of angry tone that's sort of permeating the 
panel here.  You know, I can certainly see -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Honestly -- 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
I can certainly see -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Honestly, let me just say, because we -- 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
No, no. 
 
John Donvan: 
-- don't support anger.  I think it's impassioned not anger. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
Yes, yes, yes.  It's really -- it's real.  It's [unintelligible].  But it's placed -- no, I'm -- I was 
going to get to that actually.  I think that we sort of want to understand what that 
comes from, and it comes from, I think, the kinds of failures in healthcare systems and 
the kinds of problems we have in providing exactly the optimal kind of palliative care 
that's possible.  
 
19:45:15 
 
And, you know, I've had plenty of patients who begin their journey at the end of life 
with me by asking, you know, you've got -- you're going to give me those pills, aren't you 
doc?  And I tell them, "No, I'm not going to do that.  But let's see how things progress in 
terms of your care.  I'm going to be with you.  I'm going to care for your pain.  I'm going 
to care for your depression when you're depressed."  It is not natural to be depressed 
when you're dying.  You can be sad, but to have a depression with a capital D is 
something treatable.  And as I follow these patients through to the end of their life, the 
question never comes up again because they're getting the kind of care that people 
really want, which respects their dignity, which respects their choices and keeps them 
pain free.  And that's what blunts the kind of, sort of righteous -- righteous anger that I 
think is justified in those cases where that kind of care isn't provided. 
 
John Donvan: 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 29 - 11/14/2014 

All right.  Let's hear from Peter Singer. 
 
19:46:13 
 
Peter Singer: 
Yeah, I take it that Ilora Finlay is not denying that in the UK there are requests for 
physician-assisted suicide and that indeed there is a movement because you know very 
well that there is a bill in your own House, the House of Lords, which seemed to make 
some progress just the other day.  And it's also true that there are British subjects who 
have traveled from Britain to Switzerland in order to end their life because Switzerland 
allows nonresidents, unusually, to have assisted suicide, physician-assisted suicide.  So 
it's clearly the case that it's not just the U.S. system although, you know, I wish we could 
just snap our fingers and then we would have a wonderful U.S. health system in which 
nobody needed to end their life.  But it's not an easy task, as President Obama found 
out, to reform the U.S. healthcare system.  So unfortunately, we're going to have to live 
and die with the system that we have.  But I can't really imagine a system in which -- you 
know, in the foreseeable future in which there are no serious considered requests for 
physician-assisted suicide. 
 
John Donvan: 
I'm sorry for interrupting.  I want to go to audience questions in just a moment.  
 
19:47:15 
 
But before I do, I want to take one more question to Ilora Finlay, or -- or Daniel Sulmasy 
since you're both physicians.  Part of what I'm hearing from you is that you don't like the 
fact that your profession is part of the mechanism of this whole thing.  And if -- if there -
- would you be on this stage at all if doctors weren't involved?  If there were some 
government body or some civilian organization that made these assessments and 
handed out the pills, and it didn't have anything to do with medicine? 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
I think it's really important that you talk about the assessments and that everyone's 
quite clear that not everybody who asks is getting.  That's already been said.  So, it isn't 
about true choice, if you like, because you're not actually choosing.  You're making a 
request to somebody.  I think it would be much safer if doctors weren't the gatekeepers 
here. 
 
John Donvan: 
Were or were not? 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
Were not. 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 30 - 11/14/2014 

John Donvan: 
[affirmative] 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
Because I think it would be much safer -- and my argument is about public safety -- that 
you have to produce a report to an independent body who can look at all kinds of things 
going on.  
 
19:48:27 
 
Doctors don't ask you about your personal finances.  They're not in the house.  They 
don't have in-depth understanding of the coercive pressures that may be going on at 
home.  But those pressures become important.  I have seen families that I thought were 
loving families, and actually they were hoping somebody would die before the life 
insurance policy ran out.  And the other point that I would like to make in all of that is 
the doctor needs to be looking after the whole family.  And don't forget people have 
children, they have people who they leave behind.  What is it like for a teenager, that his 
love was not enough to sustain his mother through an illness when he desperately 
wanted her to keep on living and be part of her suicide? 
 
John Donvan: 
Powerful point, and I want to take it to Andrew Solomon, who is our -- who made our 
most powerful point this evening.  
 
19:49:20 
 
And what's your response to that? 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
Well, that's actually been studied in the context of Oregon.  They've looked at the 
families of people who have had physician aid in dying and compared them on various 
psychological measures with families of people who died of natural causes.  And what 
they found is that there is no difference at all except that the people who had relatives 
who went through physician aid in dying by and large have a greater acceptance of what 
has happened and have a grieving process in which they feel there is more coherence. 
That's what the statistics in Oregon have shown. 
 
John Donvan: 
All right.  I want to go to some audience questions.  And here's one thing I want to say.  I 
think that people who have lived through this may have a desire to tell their stories 
tonight because it's such a powerful thing.  And I just want to discourage it, because we 
have people on stage who are doing that.  So, please don't do that.  But that doesn't 
mean if you have a story to tell you that still don't have a question to ask.  So, I'm fine 
with the question part of it.  So, I want to go right down here in front. 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 31 - 11/14/2014 

 
19:50:17 
 
Female Speaker: 
Kelly Posner from Columbia University.  So, my question really goes to the 
[unintelligible] to capacity and depression is often a secondary consequence to terminal 
or chronic illness.  And the wish to end one's life is actually a symptom of 
depression.  And there are studies that show that when you treat people who make 
those requests with antidepressants, they actually withdraw the request.  And you, 
Andrew, are one of the greatest proponents of antidepressant treatments that exists, so 
I was just wondering how you reconcile that?  
 
Andrew Solomon: 
Well, I think it's terribly important that people have a psychological assessment.  When 
we proposed this, what we proposed is a highly regulated system.  And we have many 
highly regulated systems.  In fact, we have a highly regulated system for making a 
decision to discontinue life support.  We already have a system for people who don't 
want to go on living and who have a serious illness.   
 
19:51:16  
 
That system in which people have to be shown to be competent, in which they have to 
be assessed not to be suffering from a psychiatric illness, in which, if there is any 
evidence that they might be, they have to undergo treatment before it's determined 
whether their decision is a fully rational decision is an appropriate set of measures.  But 
we set regulations like that everywhere.  I mean, 92 people a day die in traffic accidents 
in the United States.  We don't say, because people are dying in traffic accidents, we 
should make cars illegal.  We say people shouldn't drive over a certain speed limit.  They 
should pay attention to traffic lights.  We set a regulatory system in place.  And none of 
us are arguing in favor of an unregulated activity, and none of us are arguing in favor of 
helping people to die who have got a depression that could be calls to resolve. 
 
John Donvan: 
Would the other side like to respond? 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
Yes, because actually the -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Ilora Finlay. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 32 - 11/14/2014 

-- the data from -- the data from Oregon itself shows that they are missing those serious 
depressions.  And the Oregon system and the Washington system don't have a proper 
monitoring in place.  
 
19:52:16 
 
 There is no investigation after the death.  There is no independent commission.  And 
actually it relies on the doctor being honest enough to report what they've done, but 
there's no way of picking up if they haven't been.  So your regulatory system is actually 
failing.  And in Vermont understand that they thought that after three years they 
wouldn't need to have the safeguards in place anymore because doctors could be 
trusted, and I was really horrified when I saw that. 
 
John Donvan: 
Peter Singer? 
 
Peter Singer: 
But we are not wedded to the Oregon system or the Vermont system without saying 
that it could be improved.  I know that your House of Lords just accepted an 
amendment that there should be judicial review of doctors' decisions.  We are certainly 
welcome to consider those possibilities.  We are simply saying that there is a legal 
system of regulating assisted suicide which is worth implementing. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
And the problem is that even Charlie Falconer who’s bill this is said that nothing can be 
watertight, and that's the problem.  
 
19:53:18 
 
If you could come up with a system that was watertight that would be different, but 
that's not what you've proposed and that's not what we're debating tonight. 
 
John Donvan: 
I'm going to go to another question.  Sir, over by the wall. 
 
Male Speaker: 
I -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Just please wait for the microphone to come to you.  It's coming down the left hand 
side. Thanks.  And if -- please, can you tell us your name, please. 
 
Male Speaker: 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 33 - 11/14/2014 

My -- I'm Peter Strauss [spelled phonetically].  This is a question for the 
opponents.  Since you've injected the slippery slope argument, could you give me your 
justification for saying, "It will lead to euthanasia," which is not what any of the statutes 
in New York call for or would allow? 
 
John Donvan: 
Daniel Sulmasy. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
Sure, I think that it's simply the logic just -- if the justification, as we've heard, is that 
people have the right to choose, right, then the next step becomes, "What about that 
person who is paralyzed and can't actually take the pills?"  So, the justification becomes, 
"Well, that's actually discrimination because they actually can't take the pills," so we 
have to move from assisted suicide to euthanasia.   
 
19:54:18 
 
Then the next step becomes because the person can't take the -- say that they have the 
autonomous choice, we can infer that they would and that we would have what's called 
"non-voluntary euthanasia," not "involuntary" but "non-voluntary" in which we, like we 
do for withholding/withdrawing life sustaining treatments, say that people who are 
demented can have the family say that the treatment can be discontinued.  And all of 
this has actually happened in the Netherlands already.  So, if you want to sort of say that 
this can't happen, we've moved from a period in the Netherlands in which first of all it 
was legal -- illegal but tolerated, then to being something that was legal for persons who 
were autonomous and could ask for it, then it's moved on actually to children -- there's 
a grown again protocol for infanticide of children under the euthanasia law there -- 
psychiatric indications of people who feel that their psychiatric illness is insufficiently 
treated can ask for it and get it under those -- 
 
John Donvan: 
All right, Daniel, we see where you're going with that, and I want to take it to Andrew 
Solomon. 
 
[laughter] 
 
19:55:25 
 
Because he -- well, you just have, you know, painted the staircase of the slippery slope 
here, and I want to ask Andrew Solomon -- it sounds -- you know, it sounds real, it 
sounds concrete, does it concern you? 
 
Andrew Solomon: 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 34 - 11/14/2014 

Well, I would start by saying that the situation in the Netherlands and what's been dealt 
with in that law is different from what's been dealt with here.  But, like Peter, I believe 
that there is room for improvement even in the laws that currently exist.  But in Oregon 
we have had 17 years of this law.  There has been no evidence of involuntary 
euthanasia.  There has been no evidence of physicians giving people who are disabled 
injections to terminate their lives.  The law is narrow and specific.  And it's that narrow 
and specific law that is in discussion here.  We live on a slippery slope.  We all live on a 
slippery slope.  There are many practices within our society that, taken to extreme, 
would be incredibly damaging and detrimental, and we contain them, and we can 
contain the damage in this and accomplish an enormous, enormous good. 
 
19:56:25 
 
John Donvan: 
Ilora Finlay, do you feel that Oregon is evidence that the slippery slope is not necessarily 
inevitable? 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
No, not at all, because you've got no way of detecting abuse, and actually if you talk to 
the campaign organizations in Oregon they actually are wanting to campaign eventually 
for it to just be a pill that you can have without having to see the doctor and go through 
all that.  If you look at the Netherlands, they started off having physician assisted suicide 
and euthanasia.  But actually it was more convenient for the doctors because it didn't 
take so long, so they would go down -- they pushed it down the euthanasia route.  That 
was a -- in -- 
 
Peter Singer: 
No, that was just not true, sorry.  There was never a case when physician assisted 
suicide -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Peter Singer. 
 
Peter Singer: 
-- was legal or accepted and euthanasia was not.  But that's -- 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
-- no, no, they -- 
 
Peter Singer: 
-- [inaudible] they just didn't see that distinction. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 35 - 11/14/2014 

-- they didn't see that distinction, but they're now using euthanasia more, and also the --
complications that arose with physician-assisted suicide, because of vomiting, and 
nausea, and so on.  
 
19:57:21  
 
They've gone over to injecting drugs in -- 
 
Male Speaker: 
They both have done that. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
-- [unintelligible]. 
 
Peter Singer: 
That's really not right. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
In Belgium, they've extended it, so now you have somebody who had euthanasia 
because he had a botched sex change operation. There's been approval for a prisoner 
who wants to have euthanasia because he doesn't want to carry on living in prison, and 
so on. So, it's not a slippery slope down, but it's an incremental extension that we're 
seeing, where the law can change. 
 
John Donvan: 
Ma'am, up there. Right in the aisle. Folks, if you're upstairs trying to ask questions, I just 
want to let you know that we don't have mikes up there. But if you come downstairs, I -- 
for your effort, I'll try to call on you.  
 
[laughter]  
 
Female Speaker: 
I'm Debra Albert [spelled phonetically]. First, I think there's a point that can be made for 
anybody on the panel. I'm sort of in Peter's camp when I think about death. I don't think 
anybody here has ever experienced death. 
 
19:58:14 
 
And so, you don't actually know whether or not it is a state that is better than being in 
excruciating pain all the time. And for those that are opposed, I don't think that you can 
say that death is not a better choice. But my question actually goes to Daniel. When you 
speak about the societal effect that this can affect other people -- it's not just a personal 
choice -- I can take a drug and go outside now -- like alcohol -- 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 36 - 11/14/2014 

John Donvan: 
I -- I -- 
 
Female Speaker: 
-- get into a car -- 
 
John Donvan: 
I need you to -- you had a minute of our time.  
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
 I need you to -- I'll give you 15 more seconds to nail this. 
 
Female Speaker: 
Okay. I can take a drug that can affect death on someone's life who doesn't choose to 
die. And yet, they're not taking alcohol away from me or society. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
Yeah. Again, let me first say, in response to the first part of your question, that the 
excruciating pain that you're talking about is nothing that Ilora or I would support that 
patients have to go through.  
 
19:59:24  
 
What we're -- we are totally in support of treating patients' pain, even to the point that 
it might hasten their death. And so, there's no need -- if people think they need assisted 
suicide in order to avoid pain, that's not the issue here. That's not even why people in 
Oregon say they're taking the pills, right? It's not because of pain, because we can take 
care of that, even to the point of rendering somebody to be unconscious. What we're 
talking about is the kind of world we want to live in, one in which we can say that -- to a 
person that the fact that you think that you are a burden is sufficient to be able to end 
your own life, and that we would have an atmosphere in which that kind of judgment 
could be made by people -- I think is a problematic world to live in. 
 
John Donvan: 
I want to remind you that we are in the question and answer section of this Intelligence 
Squared U.S. Debate. 
 
20:00:18 
 
I'm John Donvan, your moderator, and we have four debaters -- two teams of two -- 
debating this motion, Legalize Assisted Suicide. Right in the center there. Yeah. You're 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 37 - 11/14/2014 

standing and -- you are the right one. If you can tell us your name, please, when the mic 
comes to you. 
 
Female Speaker: 
Hi. I'm Misha Gupta [spelled phonetically]. [unintelligible] earlier you argued that life 
support and taking someone off such ventilation is justified, due to the fact that their 
illness is progressing. However, many people applying for assisted suicide are in the 
same position. And I understand there's always exceptions to the rules, in your personal 
experience –David.  What about the candidates whose illness does not turn around and 
does progress and worsen? What's your justification or reasoning that differentiates the 
two? 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
Okay. Thank you for that question. You -- all the patients I look after have got an 
incurable illness. They all have progressive illness. 
 
20:01:15 
 
And they all have illness that is -- working towards their death and they're likely to die 
from. What I'm saying is that you can't be certain. And I am supporting them while they 
go through that phase of their lives, helping them reframe their experience, and doing 
everything I can to improve quality of life. Let me tell you one story. A woman who was 
desperate to be taken off her ventilator, but wanted a lethal overdose -- her husband 
was very angry that we weren't giving her a lethal overdose. One morning, I persuaded 
him to go out to the pub for a drink, let me have half an hour in with her, which I did. In 
that time, I asked her, "What's the worst thing for you at the moment?" And she said it 
was the whiskers on her chin. And I said to her, "Would you like me to give you a quick 
facial?" Now, I've never been trained to do it, but we found some tweezers and one of 
the nurses came and helped me. And she did indeed have some quite long whiskers on 
her chin, and we plucked them out.  And the nurse said, "Do you want to be made up 
again?"   
 
20:02:21  
 
And she said, "Yes."  We made her up.  And her comment was, when we showed her in 
the mirror, she said, "I feel like a woman again."  And from that point on, she never 
asked for lethal overdoses, but she asked to be made up every day.  Why?  Because she 
realized that she could be a woman again and have personal worth.  But my argument is 
that this motion comes from despair, from seeing that there is no worth left in a human 
being once they're ill and once they appear to be dying.  But you just can't tell.  And I 
want doctors to have to strive to improve quality of life.  And that is why I oppose this 
motion. 
 
[applause] 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 38 - 11/14/2014 

 
John Donvan: 
Peter Singer. 
 
Peter Singer: 
I find it a very sad story, actually, that that was so important to that woman, that sense 
of being a woman.  
 
20:03:18 
 
But -- 
 
[applause] 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
You've got whiskers on your chin all the time.  I'm afraid I would like mine plucked. 
 
Peter Singer: 
Okay.  But -- and I think in a way it's trivializing the reasons why people ask for physician 
assistance in dying.  It's things like being nauseous, feeling breathless, being -- just being 
able to lie there and not being able to do anything.  I mean, it may be that pain can 
generally be controlled, or I've certainly read palliative care specialists who acknowledge 
that it can in every case, except as Daniel Sulmasy just said, by making the patient 
unconscious.  But, you know, that then is getting, I think, very close to what we're 
talking about.  I've seen surveys that say that the majority of American intensive care 
specialists have used terminal sedation, that is they sedate the patient to the point of 
unconsciousness.   
 
20:04:19 
 
The patient, of course, then does not eat, and they don't tube feed the person, so the 
patient then dies.  I mean, what's the difference between giving the patient so many 
drugs that they're unconscious and then they're not fed and they die, or allowing them 
to take a drug which, at their choice and at their time, will end their life? 
 
John Donvan: 
Well, your opponents say the answer is intent. 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
And I would just add that -- 
 
John Donvan: 
But I just want Peter -- that, before you do, Andrew. 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 39 - 11/14/2014 

Peter Singer: 
But I think you have to accept, surely.  I mean, it's a fictional notion of intent to say that 
you intentionally make somebody unconscious knowing that you're not going to feed 
them and you're unintentionally ending their life?  Come on. 
 
John Donvan: 
Andrew? 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Andrew, you're going to follow quickly so that -- 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
I will quickly.  First to say that I think we're all agreed that compassionate medical care is 
to the good and that anyone who can find meaning in life or can be helped to find 
meaning in life should be encouraged to do so and receive every possible support.  
 
20:05:18 
 
But I -- 
 
[applause] 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
But I think, in keeping with what Peter has just said, that there are a great many people 
exploring a great many means to bring these ends to their lives.  There are people who 
are shooting themselves in houses by themselves because this is unavailable.  There are 
people who take this medication, someone I interviewed recently was the wife of 
someone who had managed to get medication and took it and vomited and knew he 
couldn't get another prescription and had to eat his vomit in order to ensure that he 
came to an end.  There is back alley euthanasia going on in various ways, and it is 
uncontrolled and unregulated.  And if it were legalized, it could be brought more into 
control. 
 
John Donvan: 
Daniel Sulmasy. 
 
[applause] 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
Actually, even under legalized assisted suicide, much of what you have described still 
happens.  Patients often vomit.  In fact, if you read "Final Exit" from Derek Humphrey, 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 40 - 11/14/2014 

he suggests putting a plastic bag over your head to make sure that the vomitous doesn't 
get onto the bed and that you actually suffocate afterwards if the drugs haven't worked.  
 
20:06:24  
 
And there are suicides that don't work even under those -- 
 
Male Speaker: 
[unintelligible] 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
-- even under those sorts of laws, and there are some even with this that go on outside 
of that.  But I want to go back to Peter's -- peter's point about, first of all, you know, 
again, painting the sort of medical burning lorry case, the person who's in excruciating 
pain, that's untreated, who's got uncontrollable nausea, et cetera.  I mean, these things, 
in the right hands of palliative care are probably as rare as you would suggest assisted 
suicide is in Oregon right now.  These -- we can control most of the symptoms of 
patients.  We don't have to continue life-sustaining treatments on them. They can die, 
you know, rather quickly.  But what I don't want to affirm, again, is that a patient's life is 
futile.  
 
20:07:17 
 
I can say that the treatment is futile, but not the patient themselves and that I would 
not act with the intention of making them dead.  When I give a patient drugs because 
they have pain at the end of life, and I am sedating them, I'm not sedating them to 
death.  I mean, there may be some people who do that, and that's part of the practice in 
the Netherlands that's also on a continuum with euthanasia.  But what I'm doing is 
acting with the aim of treating their symptoms.  And if in fact it takes making that 
person unconscious in order to treat their symptoms, I'm willing to accept that with the 
consent of the patient that we both are willing to take that risk, because lots of patients 
are also make the tradeoff, I'd rather have a little bit of pain and have some time to visit 
with my family.  So you've got to make that kind of decision jointly with the 
patient.  And I'm not euthanizing patients when I give them morphine at the end of life. 
 
John Donvan: 
Down in front here, please.  Third row.  Thanks.  And if you could stand and tell us your 
name, thanks. 
 
20:08:19 
 
Male Speaker: 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 41 - 11/14/2014 

Jesse Silburg [spelled phonetically].  This is to the team arguing for the motion.  So, 
physicians are fallible.  If we legalize assisted suicide, are we asking to risk their 
integrity?  And are we asking too much? 
 
Peter Singer: 
No, I don't think we're asking them to risk their integrity -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Peter Singer. 
 
Peter Singer: 
-- we're asking them to act with integrity, to consider carefully whether the 
circumstances are the ones that are prescribed in the law, as we said, could be -- have 
various kinds of safeguards and reviews, and will minimize those kinds of mistakes.  It is 
true that physicians, like everyone else, are fallible, and it is true that occasionally there 
may be a mistake, and it may be that somebody could have lived longer and even found 
their life worthwhile.  We're not saying that that can never happen, because we know 
that in all human things, things could askew occasionally.  
 
20:09:12 
 
But we don't think these rare possible cases are sufficient to say that nobody else can 
have these choice, nobody else can make this decision that "I've had enough," and that 
because of these very occasional mistakes, everybody else has to suffer through to the 
end whether they want to do that or not. 
 
John Donvan: 
Up there against the wall. 
 
Female Speaker: 
Good evening.  My name's Caroline Simpson.  This question is for Dr. Sullivan. 
 
John Donvan: 
Sulmasy. 
 
Female Speaker: 
Pardon me? 
 
John Donvan: 
Dr. Sulmasy. 
 
Female Speaker: 
Dr. Sulmasy -- 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 42 - 11/14/2014 

Male Speaker: 
Sulmasy or Solomon. 
 
Female Speaker: 
-- I apologize. 
 
John Donvan: 
Solomon's not Sullivan, and he's not a doctor. 
 
Female Speaker: 
I'm conflating you. 
 
John Donvan: 
Sulmasy is here. 
 
Female Speaker: 
Okay. 
Male Speaker: 
[unintelligible]. 
 
Female Speaker: 
My question -- my question is, I'm a little confused whether you are relying on an 
intrinsic worth of life that just is prioritized over everything or whether it's the fact that 
you believe you can relieve all pain. 
 
20:10:14 
 
Hypothetically, if someone were in excruciating pain, that just -- unbearable, no matter 
what you did in terms of palliative care, would you still be against physician-assisted 
suicide? 
 
John Donvan: 
Excellent question. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
Yes.  Again, first of all, I'm not a vitalist.  I don't think that life itself is the value here. And 
secondly, that I've suggested several times here that the person who is in the kind of 
excruciating pain you're talking about, under my care or Dr. Finlay's care, would be able 
to get increasing doses of morphine until the point that their pain was relieved, whether 
that hastened their death or not.  My aim there is not to eliminate the patient, but to 
eliminate the patient's pain.  And I foresee the possibility that this could happen, but 
that's not my aim.   
 
20:11:14  

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 43 - 11/14/2014 

 
What I want to do is reverence people, right, and not act with the specific intention of 
making them dead, of turning a somebody into a nobody.  I want to eliminate pain 
where I can.  And if it takes making them unconscious in order to do that, I'm willing to 
do it. 
 
John Donvan: 
Ma'am, did you -- all right.  Well, let's get the mic back to you because I just want to 
make sure -- it was a really good question, I want to make sure it's [unintelligible]. 
 
Female Speaker: 
I'm sorry.  I don't think you've answered my question.  Hypothetical -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Take -- take 10 more seconds and get right at it. 
 
Female Speaker: 
Okay.  Hypothetically, you cannot alleviate the pain.  No, no, no, I just -- I'm trying to 
understand your underlying argument because this feels utilitarian. 
 
John Donvan: 
Okay.  Don't argue with him, please.  Just make -- make your -- 
 
Female Speaker: 
I'm sorry.  But I'm -- I would ask you to accept the hypothetical, but I can only ask. 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
Yeah. 
 
John Donvan: 
Let -- I think -- I think your partner wants to take a crack at it also. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
Can I answer? 
 
John Donvan: 
Ilora Finlay. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
Because you've asked a practical question.  I've seen patients whose pain score was 11 
out of 10, not just 10 out of 10.  
 
20:12:14 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 44 - 11/14/2014 

I have sat there with a syringe full of Diamorphine and injected slowly, milligram by 
milligram, minute by minute until their pain score is down and it is bearable, until we 
get it under control and redouble the efforts.  And sometimes the person has seemed a 
bit sleepy for a time and we've had side effects and we've had to get over them.  But my 
role as a doctor is to relieve that suffering.  Those patients may say, "I can't bear this, I 
ought to be dead," but that does not continue, that request does not continue when 
you get on top of their symptoms.  I've had conversations with hundreds of patients 
about how they feel, about what's happening to them, many people are devastated 
when they first realize that they have a life threatening illness.  The world is not as they 
thought it was going to be.  But actually when you work with them, and it is hard work, 
they come through and they often have a fulfillment that they never imagined they 
could have before.   
 
20:13:22  
 
I've had people who've wanted theoretically to have assisted suicide or euthanasia, but 
they've abandoned that when they themselves are ill. 
 
John Donvan: 
Okay, I'm going to -- 
 
[talking simultaneously] 
 
Peter Singer: 
That's not the question.  You both evaded the question.  The question asked you to 
accept -- 
John Donvan: 
Peter Singer. 
 
Peter Singer: 
-- the hypothesis that you can't relieve the excruciating pain.  It's an attempt to 
understand your underlying philosophical or ethical position.  And neither of you -- 
you've both just evaded that question. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
No, because I don't accept -- 
 
[applause] 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
-- no, there's a fundamental premise here and a misunderstanding.  Those of us that 
actually are the ones with the drugs and the techniques to relieve the pain keep on 
trying and going back and back and back again, so you're painting a hypothetical 
question, I'm saying I faced it practically and I still oppose physician assisted suicide. 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 45 - 11/14/2014 

 
20:14:14 
 
John Donvan: 
And that concludes round two of this Intelligence Squared U.S. Debate -- 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
-- where our motion is "Legalize Assisted Suicide."  And here we are.  We are about to 
hear closing statements from each debater in turn.  Those will be two minutes 
each.  And remember how you voted just before the debate because right afterwards 
we'll have you vote a second time.  And the team whose numbers have changed the 
most between the two votes will be declared our winner.  First, on to round three, 
round three closing statements, and here to summarize his position in support of the 
motion, "Legalize Assisted Suicide," Peter Singer, professor of bioethics at Princeton 
University.  Oh, Peter, for this one we'll remain seated on all these. 
 
Peter Singer: 
Thank you. 
 
John Donvan: 
Sure. 
 
Peter Singer: 
It's easier. 
 
John Donvan: 
Well, let me wind up to introduce you again just for the ultimate radio broadcast of 
perfection. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
Here to summarize his position for the motion, "Legalize Assisted Suicide," Peter Singer, 
professor of bioethics at Princeton University and author of the book, "Practical Ethics." 
 
20:15:19 
 
Peter Singer: 
We want you to support this motion because, firstly, we believe that people should be 
the ones to decide for themselves whether they think that continued life is worthwhile 
for them or not.  We don't think that it should be up to anybody else to say, "We think 
your life is worthwhile."  And, secondly, we think that there is a lot of unnecessary 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 46 - 11/14/2014 

suffering, whether it's excruciating pain or not, there is suffering and distress of various 
sorts which continues and is going to continue for the foreseeable future in this system 
and it could be relieved by a relatively simple legislative reform that exists already and 
has been shown to work.  Now, in fact, this region today took a little step closer to 
that.  You may not know that the New Jersey State Assembly today voted to pass the 
Aid in Dying for the Terminally Ill Act which is similar to the other legislation that we've 
been discussing. 
 
20:16:20 
 
[applause] 
 
It voted 41 to 31, so a fairly clear majority.  It still, of course, has to go to the Senate, and 
then it would need the assent of a candidate -- a governor who wishes to be the 
Republican candidate for the presidency -- 
 
[laughter] 
 
-- so it still has some way to go.  But I just want to quote one of the supporters of that 
whose name is Janet Colbert.  She's a retired oncology nurse, so she knows a lot about 
cancer and about people dying from cancer.  She now herself has terminal liver cancer, 
but she supports this because she said, "As I battle my illness I would like the choice and 
comfort that comes with the option of aid in dying."  That's all we're asking for.  Thank 
you. 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Peter Singer. 
 
[applause] 
The motion, "Legalize Assisted Suicide," and here with his closing statement on the 
motion, Daniel Sulmasy, professor of medicine and ethics in the Department of 
Medicine and Divinity School at the University of Chicago, speaking against the motion. 
 
20:17:16 
 
Daniel Sulmasy: 
You know, I get questions frequently from patients who ask how I can be opposed to 
assisted suicide when they're getting sick from their chemotherapy, suffering 
complications from the big IV they've got stuck in their neck, are depressed and in pain, 
and spending more time in the hospital than outside it. So, I ask them, "Why are you still 
getting chemotherapy? Why have you got that big IV stuck in your neck? Why not ask 
for hospice to help treat your pain and your depression? Why go to the hospital? 
Supporters of assisted suicide want -- our opponents want respect for their dignity and 
attention to their individual needs. But we're all human. We're fragile, interdependent, 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 47 - 11/14/2014 

connected in bonds of mutual respect and support. Suicide is always interpersonal. It's 
an act of communication. Many persons who raise the question of assisted suicide are 
doing so because they're really testing the waters. 
 
20:18:19 
 
They are asking us if we care enough to try to stop them. And when we don't stop them, 
we confirm their deepest fears and make it difficult for them to see an alternative. And 
if the suicide happens, their physicians and families must wrestle with it the rest of their 
lives. We shouldn't be about constructing a society that makes assisted suicide routine. 
Rather, we should redirect our energies towards making sure that all patients get the 
kind of care that I think we all want, helping all of us to live to the fullness -- to the 
fullest, even as we're dying. So, I want you to vote for that kind of high-quality 
compassionate care at the end of life, and for the sort of ethical world that really makes 
that possible by voting no on assisted suicide. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Daniel Sulmasy. And that is our motion: Legalize Assisted Suicide. And here 
to summarize his position -- his position supporting this motion, Andrew Solomon.  
 
20:19:20  
 
He is author of the award-winning book, "Far From the Tree" and the other book, "The 
Noonday Demon." Andrew Solomon. 
 
Andrew Solomon: 
I take exception to the idea that all pain is treatable. It's not true to clinical data and it's 
not true to personal experience. And I also take exception to the idea that we value life 
by insisting that somebody -- to borrow your phrase "not become a nobody." That can 
be care, but it can also be oppressive. Rilke wrote, "We need, in love, to practice only 
this: letting each other go, for holding on comes naturally. We do not need to learn it.” 
Death is not only the start of nothing, but also the end of everything. And it's important 
that it keeps faith with the way that someone has lived. Nothing so resembles a person 
in his biography, as the manner of his or her death. 
 
20:20:15 
 
The finale is what makes sense of the symphony. Simone de Beauvoir's mother begged 
her for help when she was sick, and Simone de Beauvoir instead took the word of her 
doctors. And afterwards, she wrote, "Beaten by the ethics of society, I had abjured my 
own.” One is caught up in the wheels and dragged along, powerless in the face of 
specialist diagnoses that forecast their decisions. A race had begun between death and 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 48 - 11/14/2014 

torture. I asked myself how one manages to go on living when someone you love has 
called out to you in vain? Let us not treat those we love with that pusillanimous 
disregard. Let us not institutionalize and enshrine in law prohibitions that force us to 
suffer contrary to our beliefs and force us to watch those we love suffer contrary to 
their expressed wishes. 
 
20:21:15 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you. Andrew Solomon. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
 Our motion is "Legalize Assisted Suicide." And here to summarize her position against 
this motion, Ilora Finlay, a palliative care physician and president of the British Medical 
Association. 
 
Ilora Finlay: 
It's all too easy to be swayed by emotion and fear. But human beings are uniquely 
interconnected. If I accede to the request to provide lethal drugs, I actually give the 
message, "Yeah, I think you're right. You'd be better off dead." I don't give the message 
that you are of worth. I've been there myself. My own mum was in hospice dying, angry, 
terribly angry that I was opposing the assisted suicide that she wanted. She thought it 
was the answer. This fiercely independent lady dreaded dependence. It broke my heart, 
and I was torn apart by it. An argument about philosophy with a member of staff let her 
see that her mind still worked, and she still had something to offer. 
 
20:22:17  
 
So, she battled with us, all of us, and then went home, to everyone's surprise.  She 
didn't die.  She lived four more years.  And in those four years, she saw her two great 
grandsons born.  And she said they were the richest years of her life.  They were 
important to her. They were important to us all, everyone, in the family.  I beg you, it's 
not like in the movie.  Assisted suicide isn't straightforward and clean and quick.  Some 
people awake. Six did in Oregon.  Some people take a long time to die, up to 104 
hours.  That's not dignified.  Don't vote for this dangerous, dangerous law that actually 
deprives people of the possibility of having their dignity and having doctors who have to 
work to improve their quality of life.  This law allows them to throw the towel in. 
 
20:23:20 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Ilora Finlay. 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 49 - 11/14/2014 

 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
And that concludes our closing statements.  And now it's time to learn which side has 
argued best.  We're going to ask you again to go to the keypad at your seat to register 
your vote.  We'll get the readout on this almost instantaneously.  Remember, the 
motion is "Legalize Assisted Suicide."  If, after hearing the arguments, you agree with 
this motion, push number one.  If you disagree, push number two.  If you became or 
remain undecided on it, push number three.  We'll give it about 15 more seconds.  And 
if you push the wrong button, just correct yourself, as I said before.  It registers your last 
button push.  And we'll lock out the vote.  So, the first thing I would like to say is that 
this was an -- from the beginning, one of the most passionate debates we've ever had 
with a very, very high level of emotional intensity.  
 
20:24:24 
 
But I had enormous respect for how the panelists on this stage kept it civil all the way 
throughout.  So -- 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
That is our goal here, and they met it.  Also, all of the questions were very, very good 
today, even the ones that went on a little bit long.  They were -- they got to a good 
place. So everybody who had the courage to get up and ask a question, congratulations 
to them. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
I want to take a moment and thank our generous supporters who make these debates 
possible.  Our ticket sales do not cover, by any means, the cost of putting one of these 
on.  So we encourage you to go to our website if you are interested in making a 
donation, because every gift counts for us and keeps it going.  And thank you to those 
who have already done so and those of you who will.  Our next debate is here at the 
Kaufman Center.   
 
20:25:20  
 
It will be on Wednesday, December 3rd.  Our motion is, once again, a three-word 
motion:  "genetically modify food."  We will be looking at whether the world is better 
off or worse off with GM food crops, issues of safety, environment and food security.  
For the motion, we will have the chief technology officer at Monsanto and a genomics 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 50 - 11/14/2014 

and biotechnology researcher from UC Davis.  And against the motion, a research 
professor who studies agricultural technology, food quality and safety.  And that 
debater is partnered with a former senior scientist from the Union of Concerned 
Scientists. Tickets are available at our website.  And as we said at the beginning, if you 
can't get to our debates to be -- to watch them live, you can download our new app, the 
IQ2US app. It's on the Apple and Android stores.  And just search for IQ2US at iTunes or 
Google Play. 
 
20:26:14 
 
And you can watch this debate and all of our debates at our live stream and listen to 
NPR stations across the country.  Also, I want to make note that today we had a special 
section of our audience.  We have the students and the debate coaches from the New 
York City Urban Debate League.  They're with us tonight.  And you guys can stand up. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
And they're going to be continuing debating this topic themselves over the next few 
weeks, so good luck to them with that.  Okay.  So, it's all in now.  I have the final results. 
You have voted twice before the debate and again after the debate.  And the team 
whose numbers have changed the most will be declared our winner.  Let's look at the 
preliminary vote on the motion "Legalize Assisted Suicide."  Before the debate, 65 
percent of you agreed with the motion.  
 
20:27:14 
 
10 percent were against.  25 percent were undecided.  Those were the first 
results.  Again, the team whose numbers have changed the most between the first and 
the second votes will be declared our winner.  Let's look at the second vote.  The team 
arguing for the motion, their second vote was 67 percent.  They picked up 2 percentage 
points, 2 percentage points is the number to beat.  The side arguing against the motion, 
their first vote was 10 percent.  Their second vote was 22 percent.  They pulled over 12 
percentage points.  The side arguing against the motion, "Legalize Assisted Suicide," 
declared our winner.  Our congratulations to them.  Thank you from me, John Donvan 
and Intelligence Squared U.S.  We'll see you next time. 
 
[applause]  
 
20:27:56 
 
 
 
 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #1016 
  Arlington, VA 22203 


