
 
MEDIA TRANSCRIPTS, INC. 
41 WEST 83rd STREET  NEW YORK, N.Y.  10024   (212)  362-1481 

 
PROGRAM “Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

“Freedom of expression must include 
the license to offend” 
  

BGT NO. 
 

 
 

  . 

For the motion: Philip Gourevitch, Christopher Hitchens, Signe Wilkinson

Against the motion: David Cesarani, Daisy Khan, Mari Matsuda

Moderator: Jeffrey Toobin

 

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Can I ask everyone to come sit down, please?  Hello.  My name’s 

Jeffrey Toobin, I’m the moderator and warm-up act here today, 

and I just wanted to explain a few things before we got started.  

The first thing I wanted to say, which I’m sure is a great shock to 

you, is please turn off your cell phones.  Ah, see, everybody’s…   

Also, please unwrap any delicious candies you plan on eating 

during the program.  Now, I say this not because it is incredibly 

annoying to listen to both cell phones and candy unwrapping, but 

if you look above you, you will see that there are microphones.   

This event is being recorded and is going to be broadcast on 

WNYC and other NPR stations next Friday at 2 p.m. in an edited 

form.  Now, that is significant just because it’s interesting, but it 

also means that you are an integral part of the broadcast.   Your 

questions, when it comes to that, but also your reactions.  If you 

want to clap, if you want to laugh, by all means feel free.  This is 

not a solemn occasion, you’re expected to participate in it.  

Extended booing is discouraged [LAUGHTER], but please, have 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 2. 

fun.   Now, this is very good, because I’m also supposed to, as a 

radio check, ask you to give a rousing round of applause.  So 

since our panelists are coming out, why don’t you do that.  

[APPLAUSE]  Let me let Robert Rosenkranz take over from here.    

ROBERT ROSENKRANZ 
Thank you, Jeffrey.  Well, good evening, everyone, and thank you 

for being here.  I’m Robert Rosenkranz, I’m the chairman of the 

Intelligence Squared U.S. Debate Forum, which is an initiative of 

the Rosenkranz Foundation.  I’m here with Dana Wolf, our 

executive producer of this debate series.  We’d like to welcome 

you.   This is the second debate of our fall season, and with this 

season of live debates, and with our national radio audience, 

we’re pursuing a lofty, ambitious goal.  We’re trying to raise the 

level of public discourse in American life.  We see Congress mired 

in partisan rancor, we see a media that’s increasingly ideological, 

we see policy intellectuals in the think-tank world speaking to 

their respective choirs.    

 

Discussion of contentious policy issues everywhere seems to be 

dominated by intense emotions, rather than by facts and 

reasoned analysis.  But IQ Squared is not about the search for 

bland middle ground.   Rather, we want to encourage each side of 

an argument to sharpen its own thinking by listening to opposing 

views, and responding to inconvenient facts.  We want our 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 3. 

audience, who voted on tonight’s resolution, to vote again after 

hearing the debate.  I hope you’ll come away with the recognition 

that there is an intellectually respectable position on the other 

side.   We’re thrilled that WNYC is recording our series of debates, 

and that through National Public Radio, you’ll be able to hear this 

debate in many of the major cities across the country, on local 

National Public Radio-member stations.    

 

We also value the sponsorship of the Times of London, and I 

especially want to thank our moderator, Jeffrey Toobin of The 

New Yorker magazine, and CNN, whom I will formally introduce 

momentarily, and the extraordinary group of panelists who are 

the true stars of tonight’s event.   At first blush, tonight’s motion 

seems like a slam-dunk for the proposers.  95 percent of the 

pertinent quotations I looked at were ringing supports of free 

speech.  But there were a couple of more sardonic observations 

that are perhaps truer to our real attitudes.   Here’s Heywood 

Broun:  “Everyone favors free speech in the slack moments, when 

no axes are being ground.”  Louis B. Mayer:  “I respect my 

executives who disagree with me…especially when it means losing 

their jobs.”  [LAUGHTER]   Well, it’s amusing, but we do indeed 

live in a world where jobs are lost because of speech.  Larry 

Summers, for example, lost the presidency of Harvard because of 

remarks offensive to women.  Senator George Allen may well lose 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 4. 

his because of a highly arcane ethnic epithet.  [LAUGHTER]    

 

So given the heightened sensitivity of so many groups in 

American society to demeaning speech, we should hardly be 

surprised that speech offensive to Muslims elicits so strong a 

reaction, as appalled as we may be by the associated violence.  

I’m now going to hand the evening over to our moderator, Jeffrey 

Toobin.  Jeffrey is senior legal analyst for CNN Worldwide, and is 

staff writer at The New Yorker, where he’s been covering legal 

affairs since 1993.  He and I are both alumni of the Harvard Law 

School.  He joined CNN from ABC News where he provided legal 

analysis on such high-profile cases as the Elian Gonzales custody 

saga, for which he received the Emmy Award.  Jeffrey’s fifth book, 

on the Supreme Court, is due out next year, and it’s called The 

Nine: Inside the Secret World of the Supreme Court.  You’re the first 

to know that title because it was only decided upon today.  

[LAUGHTER]  I’m now very pleased to turn the evening over to 

Jeffrey.  Thank you, enjoy the debate.   

[APPLAUSE]   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Thank you, Bob Rosenkranz, and welcome to the second 

Intelligence Squared US debate.  Let me give you a brief rundown 

of the evening.  First, the proposer of the motion will start by 

presenting their side of the argument.  The opposition will follow.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 5. 

Each person will get a maximum of eight minutes and we’ll go 

back and forth from one side to the other.  Then, when all six 

speakers are finished with their opening remarks, I will open the 

floor to brief questions from the audience.  Third, when the Q-

and-A is complete, each debater will make a final statement 

lasting not more than two minutes each.   

 

Fourth, during the closing arguments, ballot boxes will be passed 

around for voting.  You all have your tickets, I assume, and if you 

don’t have your tickets with the “For” and “Against” on it, just 

raise your hand, some of the folks in the aisle have extra tickets.  

Ballot stuffing is discouraged.  [LAUGHTER]  Also, there are 

pencils and paper for people who want to jot down questions 

while the debate is going on.  Last, after the final closing 

statement is made, I will announce the results of the audience 

vote and tell you which side carried the day.  For the motion, let 

me introduce our panelists.  Author and editor of The Paris 

Review and a long-time staff writer for The New Yorker, Philip 

Gourevitch.  [APPLAUSE]  Prolific British author, journalist, 

literary critic, contrarian intellectual and subject of a New Yorker 

profile just last week, Christopher Hitchens.  [APPLAUSE]  

Pulitzer Prize-winning editorial cartoonist for the Philadelphia 

Daily News, Signe Wilkinson.  [APPLAUSE]  Against the motion, 

British scholar of Jewish history and research professor in 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 6. 

history at Royal Holloway, University of London, David Cesarani.  

[APPLAUSE]  Executive director of the American Society for 

Muslim Advancement, Daisy Khan.  [APPLAUSE]  Author, 

professor of law at Georgetown University Law Center and activist 

scholar, Mari Matsuda.  [APPLAUSE]  So let’s begin.  Signe 

Wilkinson, you’re first.   

Signe Wilkinson: 
Thank you, and thank you, Jeffrey.  Since World War III almost 

started over a bunch of cartoons, I want to thank this evening’s 

organizers for including a cartoonist—two, if you include 

Christopher Hitchens.  [LAUGHTER]  150 years ago, the 

Tammany Hall politician Boss Tweed responded to an offensive 

cartoon against him with the famous line, “Stop them damn 

pictures.”    

 

The reason we’re here tonight, is that these days, everyone wants 

to stop them damn pictures, if the damn pictures in question 

hurt their feelings or the feelings of their tribe.  When I say 

everyone, I mean everyone.  Early in my career, I penned this 

badly-drawn cartoon, “Fundamental Sex Ed—does the stork bring 

AIDS and herpes too?”  [LAUGHTER]  I expected calls from the 

fundamentalist ministers in the area, but no, I got calls from 

schoolteachers saying, “Not all teachers are fat, old and carry 

rollers!”  [LAUGHTER]  Schoolteachers aren’t alone.  In the course 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 7. 

of my 25 years as a paid professional offender, I have been 

attacked for criticizing people of color, people without much color, 

people of guns, people of excessive weight, people with trial 

lawyers, and Armenian people.  This is a partial list, and certainly 

doesn’t begin to cover people of religion, who are the touchiest 

people of all.  Unfortunately for the pious, Americans like their 

damn cartoons and they always have.  In nine—in 1872, Joseph 

Keppler drew this tribute to religion, which as you can see on the 

lower left, offensive caricatures Jews, and on the right, offensively 

caricatures Catholics.    

 

But wait—in the middle, he offensively caricatures Episcopalians, 

Mormons, Baptists, Presbyterians, and even Henry Ward Beecher, 

the New Age minister and adulterer of his age.  [LAUGHTER]  If 

we had more time, I’d show more cartoons.  So, when newcomers 

arrive on our shores, with their deeply held religious beliefs, they 

should be prepared to get in line to have those beliefs scrutinized, 

as they did in the mid-1800s when New York City, like Denmark 

today, was awash with poor foreign immigrants who came with 

their robed clerics and demands for separate schools.  These were 

of course Catholics, not Muslims, but some American cartoonists 

reacted just the way the Danes did.  In 1871, the father of 

American cartoonists, Thomas Nast, drew this.  “The American 

River Ganges.”  The hats of the reptilian bishops crawling ashore 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 8. 

have menacing crocodile teeth—certainly the precursors of a 

turban as a bomb.    

 

Usually, my colleagues don’t go out of their way to kick a 

clergyman.  However, when the clergy ask for special privileges, 

demand special tax cuts, or are just especially misbehaving, we 

take notice.  This Pat Oliphant, “The Running of the Altar Boys”…  

[LAUGHTER]  You’re cutting into my time, stop laughing.  It was 

embraced by many lay Catholics, but bitterly denounced by 

official Catholicism.  Note to church leaders—if you don’t want 

your clerics ridiculed as child abusers, make sure they don’t 

abuse children.  Had Americans been able to see the Danish 

cartoons, they would’ve noted that they too were not just 

gratuitous attacks on the faithful.  One was making fun of the 

idea that after blowing up innocent people, suicide bombers 

would be rewarded with virgins in Heaven.  If you can’t make fun 

of that, what can you make fun of.  [LAUGHTER]    

 

What really enraged believers wasn’t that Mohammed was 

pictured but that he was pictured negatively.  To test the point, at 

the height of the controversy I put Mohammed in this cartoon, 

“The Big Fat Book of Offensive Religious Cartoons.”  [LAUGHTER]  

He’s third from the right, flanked by Jesus and God, and a few 

other laughing deities.  No one protested this because no one 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 9. 

cared about Mohammed being drawn as jolly and benign.  

However, I have been picketed without putting Mohammed in a 

cartoon.  “Radical Islam Sponsors the Miss Muslim World 

Contest—Miss Illiteracy, Miss Can’t Vote, Miss Waiting to Be 

Stoned.”  [LAUGHTER]  When I say picketed, I mean picketed, 

including…  [APPLAUSE]  including by one of my daughter’s high 

school history teachers.   

 

But Muslims aren’t alone in their selective outrage.  My Jewish 

readers were okay with the drawing with the Star of David that 

was pro-Israel, but roasted me for one that criticized a local 

Jewish senator who was attacking his opponent for being anti-

Semitic.  Critics said that the Star of David was off-limits—

unless, apparently, it was used to make a point that they agreed 

with.  What critics of offensive cartoons forget is that every time I 

exercise my free speech, my readers exercise theirs, swiftly and 

loudly.  For that last little sketch with the Star of David, our 

paper received and printed weeks of vilifying letters.  The Anti-

Defamation League denounced me, I was called a Nazi, and the 

senator’s son helpfully suggested to my editors how they could 

better use my talents.    

 

One reader wrote that I was worthy of Hustler magazine, which at 

my age I take as something of a compliment.  [LAUGHTER]  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 10. 

Speaking of Hustler, its publisher, Larry Flynt, is the patron saint 

of cartoonists.  When Hustler ran a spoof claiming that Jerry 

Falwell’s first sexual  encounter was with his mother in an 

outhouse the right reverend Falwell did the Christian thing, and 

sued, in a case that went to the Supreme Court in 1987.  The 

unanimous decision was written by that famed pinko degenerate, 

William Rehnquist, who wrote that “Even though the spoof was 

outrageous, outrageousness in the area of political and social 

discourse is inherently subjective,” and that “the court has long 

protected free speech, even speech that offends the audience.”  So 

the offended are left with the same option I use—free speech.  

They can and do write, call, picket, boycott, and draw their own 

cartoons, but in America, thank God and the Constitution, they 

can’t claim special privileges and stop them damn pictures.  

Thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Next, against the proposition, Mari Matsuda.   

Mari Matsuda: 
Thank you, Jeffrey, and thank you, Signe, for making us laugh 

and making my job so hard.  It’s really not fair to put me after the 

cartoonist, but I volunteered to go first.  I’m sorry, I didn’t bring 

cartoons, and I’m not going to make you laugh.  I stand before 

you a censored person.  Under American law, there are several 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 11. 

things that I could not say.  I could not attempt to sell you snake 

oil as a cure for cancer.  I couldn’t tell you secrets that I know 

that could make you millions of dollars when the stock market 

opens tomorrow.  I couldn’t tell a lie that would harm the 

reputation of any of the people on this stage.  And I could not yell 

“Fire!” in a believable way that would cause a stampede for the 

exits.  This point is the lawyer’s point.  In a complex society, law 

necessarily mediates between competing interests.  Speech is one 

of those interests, and it is profoundly valuable.    

 

But when speech comes up against other interests that are also 

valuable, we have no choice.  We mediate, we draw lines, we 

balance.  This is what we do.  My second point is a humanitarian 

point—that words are weapons.  They can assault, wound 

degrade, exclude, and incite harm of stunning proportions.  I am 

a citizen born of the last century, one that had genocide right in 

its center.  That century will forever color my view of the harm 

that human beings are capable of.  Propaganda is not a parlor 

game and rhetoric is not recreation.  Words have consequences.  I 

take words seriously enough to make them my vocation, and I 

believe that some words should remain unspoken.  My third 

claim is that I am a Constitutionalist and a civil libertarian.  I 

believe that individuals exist prior to the state and that the state 

must remain accountable to its citizens.  Thus I am allied with 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 12. 

my opponents in this debate in their healthy distrust of limits on 

speech.    

 

Indeed, if we had time to discuss the entire history of suppression 

of dissent in this country, my guess is that all six of us here on 

this stage would agree that the record contains many deplorable 

episodes.  So why do I diverge on the particular question of 

assaultive speech and urge you to vote no tonight?  It is precisely 

because I value speech.  As I see it, there are two main reasons 

for the First Amendment or for our protection of speech.  One is 

simply that we respect individual choices.  Each of us is sovereign 

over ourselves and entitled to express the cry of our own heart.  

The second reason is functional.  We need democracy in order for 

our individual selves to thrive, and we need speech in order for 

democracy to thrive.  Democracy requires that each and every 

individual speak, think, study, know, and participate in self-

governance.    

 

When hate speech and propaganda instill beliefs of inherent 

inferiority, the very things that the First Amendment is intended 

to protect are at risk.  When racist invective keeps you away from 

a public hearing, as has happened, when sexual taunting keeps 

you away from a job, as has happened, democracy’s prerequisites 

of mutual exchange and participation are gone.  My students tell 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 13. 

me, you’ve got to give examples, people don’t understand without 

examples.  So I’ll give you one from the Asian-American 

community.  Right after the last major San Francisco earthquake, 

the big one, there was a public debate about whether to rebuild 

certain sections of the freeway.  One off-ramp in particular that 

led into Chinatown was of concern to the residents of that 

community, and they turned out for a public hearing.  Well, the 

white Aryan Resistance also decided to do a show of force at that 

hearing, in their full Nazi stormtrooper regalia.    

 

This is pre-Internet so instead of a Web site they had a hotline 

you could call to hear racist invective and find out who had 

testified at that hearing.  Many of the elders and merchants in 

that community would come out to testify, and it was their first 

experience with participation in the democratic process.  They 

were frightened away, and were very unlikely to come out again 

as the debate continued around this issue of political discourse.  

If you think about why we disallow defamation, or impose legal 

penalties for it, it’s because reputation is part of the self, and it’s 

part of the self that’s needed to participate equally in the 

democratic conversation.  If you lose standing in the community 

you lose liberty.  The freedom to move about as a respected 

person, to speak credibly, to join your fellow citizens in this grand 

social contract that we call democracy.  Your reputation is 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 14. 

valuable, and thus we will restrain speech when it takes your 

reputation from you.    

 

I submit that there are forms of assaultive speech that have very 

much the same effect.  I’ve asked for 30 years why we penalize 

someone who calls a doctor a quack, but we won’t penalize 

someone who says that by race, the doctor is inherently worthless 

and properly subject to extermination.  I haven’t received an 

answer.  If you believe, as I do, that unbridled freedom to wound 

with words and to incite through propaganda can harm the very 

freedom that we intend to protect by protecting speech, then I 

suggest that you vote against the proposition.  The other side will 

tell you we can’t start down that path of deciding which speech is 

acceptable, or we become trapped in the censorship business.  

This is a rhetorical move that lawyers call the slippery slope.   

 

What the other side will not tell you is that we are already on the 

slippery slope of tolerating censorship of certain forms of speech, 

including libel, fraud, copyright infringement, conversations in 

restraint of trade.  There is no easy and absolute way out.  We do 

have to decide when, where, and how we will limit speech.  The 

call of the question here uses the word “offensive.”  But let me 

make clear that none of us would be engaged in this debate if we 

were just talking about table manners, or humorous insults with 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 15. 

political purpose, the right to offend that Signe Wilkinson is 

talking about.  If we say that we are closing the door, taking an 

absolutist position, giving a free license to those who would use 

words to assault, we’re doing much more than just allowing 

political cartoons, which I think should be protected absolutely, 

we can discern how to do that under our legal system.    

 

But what I’m really getting at is words that are intended to 

wound, and to stop people from equal participation in society.  If I 

spit on your shoe, you can sue me for that, it’s called a battery.  

There are words I could use that would have the same effect on 

your psyche, your personhood, or your ability to move freely.  Yet 

if you vote for this proposition you’re saying that that form of 

assault is allowed.  It happens in this city and elsewhere in our 

country.  Thank you, vote no.   

 

[This section has been slightly condensed—Matsuda tried to 

continue after running out of time, hence Gourevitch’s comment 

below.] 

 

[APPLAUSE]   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Philip Gourevitch.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 16. 

Philip Gourevitch: 
Extraordinary how people who want to silence public speech 

won’t shut up.  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]  We’re faced tonight 

with people who want to stop cartooning but who make a 

caricature of the concept of free speech.  They are not here to 

discuss free speech, they are here to discuss their deep conviction 

that speech is not free and therefore should not be free.  That is 

essentially what the previous speaker said, she said there is no 

free speech, let’s be real, and therefore there should be no free 

speech and we should simply start restricting it endlessly.  Since 

we are being cartooned as the monstrous side, let me begin with a 

monstrous image.  In Northern Uganda for the last 15 to 20 

years, there has been a movement known as the Lord’s 

Resistance Army.  It practices its warfare in the name of God, and 

what it does when it dislikes the speech that is being made is that 

it cuts off the lips of the citizens who are speaking and it puts 

padlocks through punctured holes in their lips and shuts them.  

I’m afraid that I’m very much unable to picture these people doing 

that, but it’s very clear to me that that is what they wish to do.  I 

will return to this image at the end, but that is the image that 

clearly you must bear in mind as you, the jury tonight, vote on 

the question of whether we shall be permitted to speak or 

whether we shall be inclined to silence anybody in whom we find 

offense.    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 17. 

 

That is what they are saying, and who are they to judge what is 

offensive?  Surely you have different ideas, surely we all have 

different ideas, and yet somehow, the concept of offense is being 

proposed by the other side as some sort of universal measure of 

civilization rather than the opposite.  But one point of agreement 

that we have is that speech is fiercely powerful, and can be 

intensely dangerous.  I spent some time reporting from Rwanda in 

the aftermath of the genocide there.  The previous speaker 

referred to genocide, and one of the most striking things in 

Rwanda is that in a great deal of the genocide was incited by 

public speech, radio speech, incitement through words.  The 

words were used as hate speech, which we will find the other side 

thinks should be censored because it is dangerous.  The hate 

speech said, invariably, kill the minority, the Tutsis.  They didn’t 

always say it directly, they would use euphemisms and the 

euphemisms would be phrases like “Do your work.  Clear the 

bush.  Do not let a weed escape the blade.”    

 

These were phrases that were well understood in the historical 

context and they were clearly hate speech, there’s no ambiguity 

about it.  Those people have been tried and convicted for inciting 

mass murder in their country.  The problem there was not free 

speech for haters.  It was that this was the officially sanctioned 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 18. 

speech by people who prohibited sanity from being free speech.  

Anybody who protested against the genocide was silenced as 

offensive.  Offensive speech, my goodness.  That Hutus and Tutsis 

should live side by side in comity, that they should allow each 

other to exist—how offensive.  Let’s silence them.  Let’s murder 

them.  Let us have official speech.  That was the position.    

 

That is the position which—yes, ma’am.  “Slippery slope.”  It’s not 

a slippery slope, it’s a greased precipice over which they wish to 

push you.  [LAUGHTER]  Once you start to say that racist or 

blasphemous speech is somehow or other offensive, you’re 

immediately on the quick descent towards book-burning.  The 

books that you wish to burn are the books that include, let’s say, 

Huck Finn, where racists are used in possibly the 19th century’s 

noblest portrait of a black man in America.  Blasphemous speech 

is used by Ahab.  Most people who are burning books are of 

course too illiterate to notice.  [LAUGHTER]  But let’s focus on the 

facts.  They consistently elevate idiotic speech, like Holocaust 

denial, to a greatly important role by saying, lets us illegalize it, 

challenge it in courts, give these people a tremendous platform, 

and prove that they’re wrong…when no sane person can possibly 

suspect that this is serious history.    

 

So we’re going to have to elevate them in order to silence them, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 19. 

rather than to ignore them, to discuss it with them.  I would like 

to quote to you a short passage from David Cesarani in which he 

wrote, “Celebrating Austria’s Law Criminalizing Holocaust 

Denial.”  This was in The Guardian.  “Thanks to the Internet,” he 

claims, “it is virtually impossible to stop the dissemination of laws 

and propaganda these days.  The classical arguments of freedom 

of speech drawn from Voltaire and Mill are redundant.”   So we 

have an anti-enlightenment argument very strongly stated.  “They 

addressed small, literate elites at a time when the means of 

reproduction were relatively few and easily controlled, when it 

was easy to contend that in a contest between truth and 

falsehood held among reasonable men, lies would be exposed and 

driven from the public sphere.    

 

But the Internet is awash with falsehood and bigotry.  Good ideas 

and beautiful truths coexist with trash and outright evil.  Heaven 

forfend that bad ideas should be out there.  Amid this anarchy,” 

he says, “all that decent people can do is agree to reasonable 

limits on what can be said and set down legal markers in an 

attempt to preserve a democratic, civilized and tolerant society.”  

That’s what he says.  I say, who gives him the right to set up a 

chair in the antechambers of my mind and judge what I’m 

allowed to say and what I’m allowed to think.  Is that what you 

want?  Is that who you want?  [APPLAUSE]  How does it avail the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 20. 

cause of civilization, sir, to fight brownshirts with brownshirt 

tactics?  I would like to know that.  What I share with this pious 

trinity of the opposing team is a deeply pessimistic view of human 

history.  I do not believe that if you let people run around loose 

they’re going to have nice ideas about each other and behave 

nicely towards each other, because that’s not what they do.    

 

Their response is to cut off their lips and to clamp on a padlock.  

To decide who should be in the Sanhedrin of the mind and who 

should be in the Sanhedrin of the soul, sit around and tell you 

what you’re allowed to say and what you’re allowed to think.  

They do not understand that there is not agreement about this.  

They seem to assume that somehow or other it will always 

prevail.  Yes, they say times change, sometimes it’s allowed to be 

racist, sometimes it’s allowed to be anti-racist.  Sometimes we 

silence the people who are pro-Jewish, sometimes we silence the 

people who are anti-Muslim, but that’s okay because we’re just 

rolling with the times, and we’re always going to let the people 

who we sort of think are civilized speak in the name of civility.    

 

I think that this is extremely dangerous.  I return, that while they 

conclude that we must accept that because speech is limited we 

must put ourselves in charge of limiting it, that we are dealing 

here really with a case of lesser evils.  The question before us 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 21. 

tonight, simply put and simply stated in the proposition that we 

were given, is that freedom of speech must include a license to 

offend.  I would expand that license to blaspheme, and I would 

not call it a license.  They speak of it as a license, they think all 

speech is a license and that all speech should be licensed 

because most speech should be restricted before it is licensed.  

Then we decide, okay, we’ll let this out, we’ll let that out, we’ll let 

this out, we’ll let that out.  I think that that’s a very, very, very 

dangerous precipice on which they want to perch us.  I do not 

trust them, even though I think that they’re probably more 

trustable than most.    

 

But what is to say that they will stay in charge of that speech?  

What is to say that we will not fall into the hands of somebody we 

don’t trust?  What is to say that the message that one day seems 

somewhat sane, the next day becomes to kill, and that the people 

who say let us not kill are silenced in the name of reasonable 

speech and in the name of civilization to moderate that.  I remind 

you one last time as you go to vote, if you believe in chopping off 

lips and clamping on padlocks on open mouths, there’s your 

troika.   

[LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
That was Philip Gourevitch.  Next, against the proposition, David 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 22. 

Cesarani.    

David Cesarani: 
Right.  Well—   [LAUGHTER]  First of all I want to thank Philip for 

repeating verbatim something I wrote in The Guardian.  I stand by 

every word, and it’s saved me a bit of time.  I do think it is 

possible for reasonable people, like the people in this room, to 

decide what is offensive and what is dangerous.  Mari, in a very 

modest and less flamboyant way, tried to set out what it is that is 

offensive, and what is dangerous.  I don’t think it’s really 

necessary to bother to respond to a very foolish idea of what this 

side of the house is advocating.  We are not advocating cutting off 

people’s lips, we are not even advocating repealing the First 

Amendment.  We’re not even advocating special laws that will 

have people banged up in prison for saying things that we don’t 

like.  We’re just asking you, and I’m asking this as someone who’s 

British, to just reflect with a little humility on American society 

and culture.  To reflect while holding in mind the fact that, in 

most other liberal democracies, there are modest constraints on 

what can be said and written.  For good reason, too.  Most 

international conventions that set out freedoms also include 

constraints on the freedom of expression, most notably the 

European Convention on Human Rights.   

 

The reason is that the European Convention on Human Rights 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 23. 

that was passed in 1950 was framed against the background of 

genocide, mass murder, persecution, and totalitarianism in 

Europe.  Men and women had seen the drip-drip effect there of 

hate speech, words that demeaned and degraded, and resolved 

that freedom of speech could no longer be considered an absolute 

right.  It was a right, a fundamental element of liberty.  But it was 

not absolutely overriding because it was open to abuse.  It was 

abused in Europe, it’s abused now, and I’d say it’s actually 

abused here.  Philip Gourevitch said rather mockingly that we 

came to you to ask you to get real.  I’m going to repeat that.  Get 

real.  There was a little article in The Guardian which amused me.  

Apparently, a few days ago, a meeting to be addressed by a 

colleague of mine, Tony Judd, a historian who I rate enormously 

highly, was canceled because of a phone call from Abe Foxman.    

 

I don’t know if Abe Foxman is in this audience now, but he’s 

obviously a very powerful man.  Just with the one of his voice he 

can have meetings canceled and freedom of expression curtailed.  

I think that is an abuse of power.  I think that it is very 

dangerous that people can phone up organizations and have 

meetings canceled because they don’t like, not what the speaker 

is actually going to address, but other things that he has spoken 

about.  Tony Judd has written some things about Israel that Abe 

didn’t like, so Abe phoned up the Polish consulate and said, do 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 24. 

you really want to have that guy speak on your premises?  Now, 

get real.  You have constraints on freedom of expression in this 

great country.  What we are asking you to do is to reflect with a 

little bit of humility on how you want those constraints to be 

exercised by the most powerful, the most ruthless, the ones with 

the biggest bank balances, the ones with the most votes.    

 

Or do you want to have a public debate about how you protect 

those who are weak, who are vulnerable, who are defenseless, 

who are marginal, and who are often abused in the mass media 

or in work settings, as Mari mentioned.  I think the real choice is 

not whether you’re in favor of absolute freedom of speech or 

constraints on freedom of speech tonight.  It’s whether you’re 

going to be realistic, or whether you’re going to be smug and 

hypocritical and walk out of this hall thinking this is the land of 

the free, land of the brave, no such things as restrictions on 

freedom of speech here, and we don’t want to be lectured about 

that by some limey.  [LAUGHTER]  Whether you’re going to recite 

to yourselves happily, Milton, Locke, Mill!— without actually 

knowing very much about what Milton, Locke and Mill had to say 

about freedom of expression.  For none of these men was freedom 

of expression a good in itself.  It was always a means to an end.   

 

For Milton, who didn’t like Catholics, it was to expose the fallacies 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 25. 

of Catholicism prior to crushing and eradicating them.  For 

Locke, it was simply a means to good governments.  For Mill, it 

was to advance education and truth.  As soon as Mill considered 

the possibility of uneducated mass audiences, he panicked and 

resiled.  He went back on everything that he’d said about 

unlimited freedom of speech.  I’m going to read out what John 

Stuart Mill had to say.  “Acts of whatever kind, which without 

justifiable cause do harm to others, may be—and, in the more 

important cases, absolutely require to be—controlled by the 

unfavorable sentiments and when needful by the active 

interference of mankind.”    

 

He included speech acts, and the notorious, wonderful example 

he gave is the folly of allowing a man in a time of famine to 

inveigh against grain dealers outside the home of a grain dealer 

before a public that is hungry, ill-educated, and not terribly 

reasonable.  That unfortunately is the state of our society today.  

There are a lot of people who are unreasonable, who are ill-

educated, who are angry about this and that, and there are 

plenty of people who want to stir the pot and who want to incite 

them.  John Stuart Mill, who understood the perils of mass 

society, also understood that we are no longer conducting this 

discussion amongst a nice, homogeneous elite, but we are having 

to deal with huge numbers of people in divided, conflicted 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 26. 

societies.  I think—and I’m an optimist, unlike Philip 

Gourevitch—that we have it within our power, thinking and 

working together, to agree on what can and cannot be said, 

should and should not be said, to avoid conflict, to avoid people 

standing outside the homes of grain merchants, and inveighing 

against their business.    

 

This is what Timothy Garton Ashe wrote recently in The Guardian.  

“We need to wake up to the seriousness of the danger”—the 

danger to freedom of speech, freedom of expression.  “I repeat, 

this is one of the greatest challenges to freedom in our time.  We 

need a debate about what the law should and should not allow to 

be said or written.  Even Mill did not suggest that everyone 

should be allowed to say anything anytime anywhere.  We also 

need a debate about what it’s prudent and wise to say in a 

globalized world where people of different cultures live so close 

together, like roommates separated only by a thin curtain.  There 

is a frontier of prudence and wisdom which lies beyond the one 

that should be enforced by law.”  We are, on this side of the 

house, advocating that you think about where that boundary of 

prudence and wisdom should lie.  We’re not repealing the laws, 

we’re not passing them, we want you to reflect.  Thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 27. 

Jeffrey Toobin:  
That was David Cesarani against the proposition.  Now for the 

proposition, Christopher Hitchens.   

[APPLAUSE]   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Well now, Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, brothers and 

sisters…if I may say, comrades and friends.  [LAUGHTER]  Okay, 

then, “Fire!”  [LAUGHTER]  It’s not that crowded a theater, but 

“Fire!” again.  You see?  If you remember the appalling judgment 

actually rendered by Mr. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes in that 

case, he was comparing the action that I’ve just imitated and 

parodied to the action of a group of Yiddish-speaking socialists 

who gave out a leaflet, in Yiddish only, opposing Mr. Wilson’s war 

and actually calling attention as they were to a major 

conflagration raging in Europe in which they did not think the 

United States should become involved.    

 

Be very, very, very careful when people give you arguments from 

authority or tradition that suggest that free speech can be limited 

by higher authorities like the sainted Holmes, because that’s 

what you’ll get.  The end of it is a group of Yiddish-speaking 

radicals told they can’t hand out a leaflet in Yiddish on a major 

question of the day.  That’s always how it will end, no matter how 

high-mindedly or creepily or sinisterly it’s presented to you.  My 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 28. 

favorite crowded-theater story is actually about the terrible 

Broadway production of The Diary of Anne Frank.  Some people 

may remember this, it’s a production famous for its longueurs.  

[LAUGHTER]  In the third act as the German soldiers came 

pounding on the door and stamping into the parlor, someone in 

the front row shouted, “She’s in the attic!”  [LAUGHTER]  Call me 

old-fashioned if you will, ladies and gentlemen, but as you will 

see I don’t think a joke is really a joke unless it’s at somebody’s 

expense.    

 

Now if you’re thick-skinned and broad-backed enough to take 

that, I might have a bit more for you.  The real question, utterly, 

utterly dodged by David in his shady remarks, is this.  Who’s 

going to decide.  We’ve already found that Oliver Wendell Holmes 

isn’t competent on the point.  Who will you appoint.  Who will be 

the one who says, I know exactly where the limits should be, I 

know how far you can go and I know when you’ve gone too far, 

and I’ll decide that.  Who do you think—who do you know—who 

have you heard of, who have you read about in history to whom 

you’d give that job?  I always say, just for this evening, I wouldn’t 

give it to anyone who’s spoken so far on the other side.  

[LAUGHTER]  Now, I sure do know a bit about Milton and quite a 

lot about Thomas Paine as well.  Mr. Paine actually updated and I 

think improved John Milton’s Areopagitica which is the classic 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 29. 

case for free expression.    

 

Those of you who know Areopagitica and Paine’s commentary on 

it will know that it recommends free speech in this way—not for 

you, but for the people you are listening to and the people whose 

comments you hope to hear in return, for your own education, for 

your own enlightenment and for your own elucidation.  As Mr. 

Paine says, commenting on Milton, one of the vices of those who 

would repress the opinions of others is they make themselves 

prisoners of their own opinions, because they deny themselves 

the rights and the means of changing them.  Should this not be 

as plain as could be?  The free interplay of ideas is not something 

that those of us who wish to speak or unload our opinions insist 

upon for that sake, it’s because we want to hear what is said in 

response, however unwelcome it may be to us.    

 

Thus the defense of any one opinion or form of expression is a 

defense of all of them.  The classic statement in modern times of 

this, in my view, would be Aryeh Neier’s book Defending My 

Enemy where he describes the decision of the American Civil 

Liberties Union, of which I am a supporter, to take the case of the 

American Nazi Party and its right to parade swastikas through 

the town of Skokie, Illinois, a favorite retirement community for 

those who’d survived the final solution.  The ACLU lost a lot of 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 30. 

members on that proposition but we did the right thing by the 

First Amendment.  In the book he has a wonderful extract from 

Robert Bolt’s play A Man for All Seasons which some of you will 

have seen at least in celluloid form, where if you recall, Sir 

Thomas More is talking to one of the witch-hunters and 

prosecutors.    

 

He says, “So you’d cut a road through the laws, would you, to get 

after the Devil?”  The witch-hunter and prosecutor says, “I’d cut 

down every law in England to do that.”  Thomas More says, 

“That’s worth knowing.  And when the Devil turned round to meet 

you and had you at bay, where would you look for shelter, Mr. 

Prosecutor, the laws all being flat and cut down?  Where would 

you turn then?”  It’s impossible ever to think of infringing the 

right of anyone else to free speech without arranging, in a sense 

calling in advance for this to happen to you too.  It’s quite 

different, obviously different, from any question of information.  

Information may be classified and information may be 

copyrighted.  Every word said on that score by the first speaker 

on the other side was a complete waste of her breath, because it’s 

not what we’re meant to talk about.  We’re meant to talk about 

the expression of opinion and conviction, not breach of copyright 

or leaking of classified information.  If we’d wanted to talk about 

that, we would’ve phrased the motion differently.    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 31. 

 

There’ve been some bad signs lately, a lot of slippage in what I 

would have thought was the pedantic obviousness of the points 

I’ve just made.  The imprisonment of David Irving in Austria for a 

thought crime, for the possibility that he might while in Austria 

have given a speech saying that he doubts some of the verdicts of 

history on what I call the final solution.  There’s no victim to this 

crime.  The Austrian consul called me up weeping with self-pity 

when I pointed this out in The Wall Street Journal and said, “But 

we thought finally Austria would be popular.  [LAUGHTER]  We 

had something that you would all like!  So gut muttlich.”  That the 

land that survives on the myth that Hitler was German and 

Beethoven was Viennese, that had Waldheim as its chancellor 

and has Jorg Heider as a member of its government, can revenge 

itself on a defenseless British academic and jail him is a standing 

disgrace.    

 

There are attempts to extend similar thought-crime laws to other 

topics of historical importance, the most depressing of which 

recently is the provisional decision of the French parliament to 

criminalize discussion of the Armenian massacre, considered by 

me and most others to have been a planned genocide in the early 

part of the 20th century.  Now you couldn’t take the contrary view.  

You couldn’t for example argue, as you can, that actually in the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 32. 

provinces of Turkey where Russian forces were not engaged, 

Armenians were not massacred.  In other words, it could be that 

it was partly an act of war as well as an act of ethnocide.  

Speculations of this kind would now be actually in peril.  The law 

on which it’s modeled, the Loi Gayssot, which criminalizes in 

France discussion of the Holocaust as well, is named for the 

French Stalinist, Monsieur Gayssot, who sponsored it and whose 

spirit, and the spirit of whose hero is present in all of these and 

other such discussions.    

 

I stipulate that all of these things, when they happen, offend me 

very much.  I’m offended by them, I want you to understand.  It 

goes to the core of what I do and what I am.  The First 

Amendment doesn’t just provide me with a living, the First 

Amendment is my life.  When it’s infringed, I am offended, I have 

claimed the right to be offended.  I do not claim the right to go 

burn down someone else’s place of worship, to threaten their 

religion with violent reprisal, to picket their home, to publish their 

name in threatening terms on the Internet—I won’t do any of 

that.  It doesn’t mean I can’t be offended but it does mean that 

I’m even more offended by those who claim the right, not just to 

be offended, but to seek violent reprisal, as is so vividly and 

currently being done by the votaries of the prophet Mohammed, 

in recent instances which I have no time at all to inform you but 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 33. 

about which you already know and to which I hope I will be asked 

to return.  Thanks very much.   

[APPLAUSE]   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
That was Christopher Hitchens for the proposition.  Against the 

proposition now, Daisy Khan.   

[APPLAUSE]   

Daisy Khan: 
Distinguished guests, Philip, Signe, and Christopher.  First of all, 

I think it was divine intervention that Christopher was not 

allowed to continue.  [LAUGHTER]  I think Christopher should 

nominate me to decide who will decide, because really, 

Christopher, I’m quite fair.  I definitely do not believe in cutting 

off lips, and I hate padlocks.  So I want to begin by saying that 

the motion of today, where the freedom of expression must 

include the license to offend, is in a sense really a moot point and 

a moot question.  I hope that all of you here today will consider 

rejecting and throwing it out.    

 

The freedom we have to express ourselves does in fact enable us 

to offend.  Christopher is doing it all the time, in his own sweet 

way.  In fact, one can even say that sometimes it is necessary to 

offend, and for good cause.  The appropriate question to ask 

today is whether freedom of expression is absolute and limitless, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 34. 

or should it come with some social responsibility.  In the US we 

do have a value system that undergirds our free speech.  Salient 

within the system is the value of fighting the suppression of truth.  

Let’s face it.  The reason why we’re having this debate today, is 

because a number of recent events, such as the Danish cartoon 

and Pope Benedict’s remarks on Islam, have brought this issue to 

the forefront.    

 

I’m mentioning these examples to frame the current affairs 

context for our discussion here today.  There is no doubt in my 

mind that there are many issues, many suppressed truths, 

particularly within the Muslim world, that very badly need to be 

brought to light.  I do not need to go through the litany of 

problems faced, for instance, by women in various parts of the 

Muslim world and the rest of the global South, all of which need 

to be discussed.  There’s also no doubt in my mind that when it 

comes to religion, Muslims need to engage in a very honest and 

open discussion about many of the values that they espouse.  

Whether they are in accordance with the teachings of Islam is 

another matter entirely.  There are, however, certain kinds of 

speech that undermine the very values that liberty of expression 

is meant to advance.  Take for example the infamous Danish 

cartoon protest.    

 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 35. 

To put it into context, we live in an environment—and this is 

especially true of Europe—where Muslims constantly face 

xenophobia.  While the overwhelming majority of the world’s 1.2 

billion Muslims do not partake in any violent actions in response 

to these political cartoons, a tiny, minuscule minority has 

grabbed the world’s attention and apparently now has absolute 

command of how Muslims are to be perceived.  This is coupled 

with a time when a new generation of European-born Muslims 

have emerged that routinely face discrimination, alienation, and 

are often perceived as threats in their own countries.  And all this 

while the violence in Iraq continues to surpass its already 

shocking levels.  Clearly, we’re living in a very tense time.  In 

such a situation, for a right-of-center Danish newspaper to come 

out with cartoons that show the prophet of Islam with a bomb in 

his turban, with a sword in his hand, and with a menacing look 

on his face does nothing, absolutely nothing, to advance 

desperately needed dialogue, or enlighten people in any positive 

way.    

 

If it does anything at all, it serves to suppress constructive 

dialogue by fueling extremist sentiments.  It is important to note 

that this example has little to do with religion, though I think 

Philip and Christopher would probably tell you that’s the case.  

This isn’t about drawing the prophet, for which there are many 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 36. 

historical precedents in traditional Muslim art.  To see the 

situation clearly, we must all understand nuance.  That’s what 

intellectuals are here for—for nuance, for teaching us the nuance.  

My Jewish rabbi friend called me right after the cartoon crisis and 

said, “What are you doing about the cartoons?”  I said, “What are 

we going to do?  It’s just a cartoon.”  He said, “No.  Don’t ever 

accept it.  This is what they did to us in Germany.  They started 

with the cartoons”—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Excuse me—   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Wait, wait.  Come on, come on.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
No, that’s offensive.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Well—  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]  That—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
That’s stupid.    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Well—no, come on, Christopher, no, no, Christopher, come on.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Stupid, nasty—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Christopher, come on.  Daisy, this will not be deducted from your 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 37. 

time.    

Daisy Khan: 
So when you publish cartoons which of course are a form of 

entertainment and hence immensely popular—and Signe, I loved 

that cartoon of the radical Islam contest—as a medium for 

conveying a particular message, or a speech is given by a person 

of immense power like the Pope, which further drives people apart 

and cements stereotypes, you’re using public discourse to malign 

the way an already marginalized community is perceived.  This, 

my friends, is not in accordance with our foundational values of 

free speech.  This is un-American.  The point is not whether such 

things can or cannot be published.  But of course, they are 

published.  Who’s preventing them?  The issue is whether there’s 

any wisdom in showing the prophet of Islam with a bomb in his 

turban no less.  This is the sort of thing that furthers that 

familiar, yet dangerous and unsound argument, some Muslim 

men are terrorists, therefore, all or even most Muslim men are 

terrorists.  Now this last statement is certainly something we can 

say, something that is enshrined in free speech.  But is it true?  

Is it responsible?  Does it elevate the public discourse?  Or is it 

simply racist, xenophobic drivel, that isn’t half as clever as it 

purports to be?    

 

There are a few additional things to say.  While modern 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 38. 

technology has allowed us to improve our communication, it also 

means that ideas, news and statements can be disseminated at a 

global level very rapidly.  The upshot is that the global distance is 

of little relevance in assessing how close we are to each other.  So 

the notion of space, of sharing space with our neighbors, needs to 

be negotiated and reexamined.  What is needed now is a 

heightened sense of awareness that enables us to distinguish 

between useful and useless affronts.  Truly, few things are more 

useless than statements that exasperate [sic] bigotry and racism.  

Finally, in keeping with my previous point, I want to make a point 

about individual psychology in various societies.  We’re always 

shocked at how people in the global South react vociferously, 

especially my people, Muslims, and at times violently, to what we 

see as simple free speech which may or may not undermine their 

value system.    

 

What we do not realize in our dismay is that in societies where 

the basics are not guaranteed, where one life, liberty, property, 

and family are not protected, individuals deal with disparities by 

developing a greater collective consciousness, where one identifies 

strongly with a larger community, in our case the Uma, and the 

collective values it represents.  Something that is perceived to 

threaten or undermine those values are resolved not an individual 

level, but are resolved in a group dynamic which can sometimes 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 39. 

result in chaotic mob reaction, which you’re all familiar with.  In 

an environment defined by major uncertainties, heightened 

inequities, depictions like the Danish cartoons are perceived as 

yet another attack on what for some people sadly remain the final 

salvation—their dignity and their faith.  And Signe’s right, 

religious people are the touchiest.  It should come as no surprise, 

then, to see that—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Daisy, that’s time.    

Daisy Khan: 
I want to just finish one last—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Well, finish the sentence, finish the sentence.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Finish by naming the rabbi.   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Stop—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
I want to know who that rabbi was—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
[LAUGHS]  Sorry, we’ll get to that.  We’ll get to that—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Name that rabbi—   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 40. 

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Christopher—  [LAUGHS]   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Name that rabbi—     

Daisy Khan: 
The rabbi is my secret weapon and I told him I would never do 

this.  Ultimately, the question to ask is do we use our free speech 

to insult an already marginalized people?  Or do we use it to 

advance and enhance a desperately needed discourse between 

people living in an increasingly interconnected world.  I hope 

you’ll throw out the other motion.  Thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Okay.  Thank you, Daisy Khan.  All right, before we get to the 

questions, I’m now ready to present the results of the pre-debate 

vote.  Before the debate, 177 of you voted for the proposition, 25 

against, and 24 don’t know.  So we’ll see if that changes.  We’re 

now ready to begin the Q-and-A portion of the program.  I will call 

on the questioners, and someone on each side of the auditorium 

will come to you with a microphone.  Please stand when you ask 

your question, and I ask that you please make your questions 

short and to the point.  Members of the press should identify 

themselves as such.  Members of the audience who are not of the 

press can identify themselves or not as they see fit.  Why don’t 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 41. 

you, sir, ask the first question.    

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
My name is Barry Fredericks.  I have a question.  Have you all 

forgotten about Gallileo?  I mean this conversation about religious 

problems and insulting people, I mean, we’ve tried that case in 

the third century.  Do we want to go back?  I notice there are 

groups in the Islamic world that’d like to go back to the 13th 

century.  But do we really want to make that argument.    

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Okay, that’s a good question.  Who would like to respond.  

[LAUGHTER]    

Signe Wilkinson: 
I’m for going back to the 13th century, personally.   

Philip Gourevitch: 
Yeah.   

Signe Wilkinson: 
Is that the question?   

Philip Gourevitch: 
He was much on my mind as I came here tonight.  [LAUGHTER]  

But I thought, here I am, facing the anti-Gallilean forces once 

again…  [LAUGHTER]  And I expected them to be very, very old, 

so this…very strange.  Very strange arrangement.   

David Cesarani: 
If I can—   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 42. 

Jeffrey Toobin: 
David?    

David Cesarani: 
Yes, the gentleman has repeated a hoary old myth about Gallileo.  

He actually was not persecuted—  

Philip Gourevitch: 
I find the word “hoary” offensive.    

David Cesarani: 
—for his astrological discoveries.  He was persecuted for various 

other things.  He was patronized by the Pope, and he didn’t get 

into trouble with the Pope until he crossed swords with the 

papacy on completely different issues.    

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
That’s not true.  He was [INAUDIBLE]—    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
The next debate is about Gallileo, so—    

David Cesarani: 
Read some history books that have been written within the last 

30 years.   

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
I have.   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
All right, why don’t we have another question?  [LAUGHTER]  Yes, 

ma’am.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 43. 

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
I just want to make the point, and I think this is directed at 

Daisy, who talked about racism and bigotry, and then just talked 

about her Jewish friend.  You are against the motion to offend, 

and yet I think you offended most of the people in this room.  If 

anybody has a comment on that, I’d like to hear it—   

David Cesarani: 
Yes, I have a comment, I wasn’t offended.  I wasn’t offended and 

I’m Jewish—   

Daisy Khan: 
My Jewish friend came to my aid and came to the aid of my 

community—    

Christopher Hitchens: 
Nor was I, actually, I was only pretending to be.  [LAUGHTER]   

Philip Gourevitch: 
I was just fascinated that she only had one.  [LAUGHTER]    

Christopher Hitchens: 
I don’t believe she has one.  I want to know that rabbi’s name.   

Philip Gourevitch: 
It ought to be traceable.  Could I suggest that she speak to some 

others, because really, it’s not a majority view amongst Jews, and 

to try and invoke her one Jewish friend to paint this majority view 

is quite preposterous.    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 44. 

David Cesarani: 
Now what you’re saying, Philip, is preposterous.  Throughout 

Europe, the Jewish communities were very divided over the 

Danish cartoon issue.   

Philip Gourevitch: 
The European Jewish communities have—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Well, let him finish—    

David Cesarani: 
Hello—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
—been virtually eradicated—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Let him finish, let him finish.   

David Cesarani: 
Just a minute.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
David, go ahead.  [APPLAUSE]   

Philip Gourevitch: 
They live here, buddy.  They live here now.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
No.  David.    

David Cesarani: 
A lot of the Jewish communities in Europe, including the Jewish 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 45. 

community in Britain, and these views are articulated by the 

chief rabbi, Jonathan Sachs, who felt that the cartoons were not 

only offensive but were dangerous for the reasons that Daisy 

gave.  Yes, because to many Jewish people that kind of 

demonization of a religion and a religious-ethnic group brought 

back some very sick and bad memories.  That is why in Europe—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
Yes, of people burning books in the street—   

David Cesarani: 
—there is a much greater tolerance of what this side of the house 

is advocating than on that side, which is displaying an 

extraordinary degree not only of disrespect but also of arrogance 

and an astonishing unwillingness to face a real past.    

Philip Gourevitch: 
I’m highly interested in facing a real past and that’s particularly 

why I feel that if your belief is that by muzzling Nazis you’re 

making us safe, I hope you’re not watching my back when they 

come back at us.  I’m telling you the truth.  [APPLAUSE]  If you 

think that there’s a mute button, and that by saying, oh, Nazis 

can’t speak in public, Nazis must be put in jail.  We’re going to 

eradicate Nazism, rather than by having Nazis in a country where 

you can actually speak to them and argue with them, and not 

dignify them by putting them on trial every time they say 

something completely idiotic.  You’re elevating Nazis and putting 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 46. 

them down and then inciting a couple of politicians in Europe.    

David Cesarani: 
It doesn’t dignify them.  David Irving’s battle against Deborah 

Lipstadt exposed him for what he was, it was very effective.  He 

had faced—    

Philip Gourevitch: 
He exposed himself for what was, he said the Holocaust didn’t 

exist and it did.  If you were to eradicate all false history you’d 

have to stop all newspapers, it’s ridiculous.  [LAUGHTER]   

Signe Wilkinson: 
I beg your pardon.  [LAUGHS]    

David Cesarani: 
Faced by a prison sentence, David Irving courageously renounced 

all that he’s previously said about denying the Holocaust.  The 

trial was very effective, and I don’t actually agree with putting 

people in prison for advocating Nazi propaganda and a version of 

The Protocols of the Elders of Zion because that’s what David 

Irving does.  It’s not a kind of genteel rewriting of history which 

Christopher seems to think.  It is the most poisonous kind of 

conspiracy theory—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Why do I seem to think that?   

David Cesarani: 
Well, it’s what you said in your article—   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 47. 

Christopher Hitchens: 
To the contrary.  Very much to the contrary—    

 David Cesarani: 
—and what you said just earlier, that he is engaged in the 

revision of history.  He’s not, he’s a neo-Nazi propagandist, and 

this is what Justice Gray said in the verdict in his battle with 

Deborah Lipstadt.  He is a neo-Nazi political activist, and he is 

using distorted history to propagandize for his cause.   

Philip Gourevitch: 
And nobody had much heard of him until you put him on trial.   

David Cesarani: 
Well, you can fill it, you’re a journalist, you’re supposed to know 

these facts.  He’s a best-selling author.  He’s very important guy, 

he gets into people’s living room.  Not for a while though, because 

he’s in a prison cell.   

Philip Gourevitch: 
Nazis always get in the living room, but—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
His book, his edition of The Goebbels Diary is a very useful and 

interesting book that everyone who wants to know more about the 

period should read.    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Let’s get some more—    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 48. 

Christopher Hitchens: 
For example, it’s only in that book that it’s proved that the British 

Union of Fascists took money from the Nazi party, a claim they’d 

always denied.  The question is, do you think you’re big enough to 

read a book by David Irving and make up your own mind about 

it, or do you think that someone else should do that for me.  

Right?  [APPLAUSE]    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Yes, next question.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
A very simple question.   

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Alan Miller, New York Salon.  I do take issue particularly with 

David Cesarani’s view, when he talks about how vulnerable 

everyone is.  It’s almost like an egalitarian-speak, this notion that 

humans are not robust and cannot discuss ideas and make 

decisions and be autonomous.  So my question to the panel 

tonight is, when it comes to the really tricky, sticky issues, like 

we see around children and pedophilia, or as we see on the 

campuses, where we see speech etiquette, or when we see in the 

workplaces speeches of code, would they agree with the prospect 

that you should have the right to be offensive, and free speech at 

all times.  That’s my question to them.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 49. 

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Mari, can you address that?   

Mari Matsuda: 
The line that I draw is between the right to dissent, to express 

your opinion, if you’re Gallileo, to oppose the powers that be and 

say that the sun is the center of the universe, that’s free speech.  

That’s what we need for democracy to thrive.  The speech that I 

think is of lower value and that I’m asking us to consider 

restricting is speech that assaults, wounds, degrades and 

excludes.  Let me give you a specific example since you raised the 

workplace.  It’s a frequent pattern that the first woman to show 

up in a traditionally male job, in the coalmine, on the oil rig, is 

relentlessly harassed—with words.    

 

Men describing her body, and saying they would like to rape her, 

and describing what that would be like.  She goes to work every 

day and tries to do her job, up on a construction site.  I think 

that goes beyond offense.  I think that is an effort to exclude.  

People use these words because they’re tied to a history of 

violence, because they do terrorize people, and that is their 

intent.  Now the other side is trying to say that we’re for opening 

the door of censorship.  I certainly don’t stand for that.  I think 

that this audience voted in the vast majority for the proposition 

precisely because they distrust censorship, and that’s good, that’s 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 50. 

important.  Any effort to limit speech has to be done carefully, 

through the rule of law, with discernment.  But we can do it.  

We’ve done that with defamation.   

 

We allow people to insult each other, but we don’t allow them to 

destroy character and reputation in ways that the law calls actual 

malice.  It’s very close to requiring intent.  That’s a limit, that 

means that a lot of very nasty speech is still allowed.  But we’re 

trying to create that breaching space so that women can go to 

work, so that that family that’s the wrong race can move into that 

neighborhood, where we can have conversations like this one that 

are very hard.  If it degenerates into name-calling the 

conversation shuts down, and what I’m trying to do is prevent the 

conversation-ending move in a world in which we need to talk.   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
That’s Mari Matsuda, Signe Wilkinson?  [APPLAUSE]    

Signe Wilkinson: 
One little example of how this works in the real world was in the 

mid-‘90s at the University of Pennsylvania.  There were some kids 

making noise outside of a dorm room.  Some guy leaned out the 

window and told the water buffaloes to shut up.  The water 

buffaloes took it to the speech code people at the university.  Had 

they not, the guy who had said “water buffaloes” would’ve been 

the jerk that he was, but as it turned out, then the girls who got 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 51. 

all upset about it made a federal case out of it.  They ended up 

looking stupid, as did the administration of the University of 

Pennsylvania.  Water buffaloes, I mean where are you going to 

draw the line?  It’s an animal, it’s not like saying—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
A very nice animal—   

Signe Wilkinson: 
—I’m going to kill you.  So to me it’s like…if you let someone say 

something stupid, they’re the ones who look idiotic.  If then you 

start—like David Irving, I might add—but when you start taking 

him on and like Christopher said giving him the platform, then 

it’s you who are starting to look like you can’t quite join the 

debate.   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Let’s take another question.  Can you hand that woman the 

microphone?  I’m sorry.  We’ll get to you next.    

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Okay, my question is the following.  There was a cartoon in the 

New York Times a couple of weeks ago which was never talked 

about, and it was from Ohio.  They always do a synopsis of 

cartoons that they think are particularly relevant—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Yes, we know.    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 52. 

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
So it was the Pope saying, “I’m sorry that my remarks about 

Islamic violence provoked Islamic violence.”  Now, nobody made a 

big scene about that, but who made the big scene about the 

Danish cartoon, who fired up the world about the Danish 

cartoon.  Who got it started was an Islamic cleric, who got 

everybody in an uproar—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
So what’s your question?   

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
So my question is, why does this happen only in this situation 

when it was outside of the United States, and why did it not 

happen here.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Okay.   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Daisy, do you have a response?  I think that was mostly 

addressed to you.   

Daisy Khan: 
Yes.  Well, I think what happened with the Danish cartoon was 

that when the cartoon was published there was a small 

demonstration by certain Muslim groups.  The newspaper decided 

they were not going to pay any attention to that because they had 

a license to free speech and expression which was fine.  Then 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 53. 

they took it up to some of the ambassadors of Muslim countries 

and they were hoping that their intervention might have helped 

with the situation.  The ambassadors called for a meeting with 

the prime minister, and that meeting was refused.  As you know, 

the ambassadors were ambassadors from various Muslim 

countries, and they wanted to have a meeting with him.  He 

basically said I have nothing to do with this because this is not 

within my realm.  They called for a lawsuit, and that lawsuit was 

not pursued.  Basically the community felt their hurts and their 

concerns were not being addressed.  They went overseas and 

sought support from overseas and then the whole situation went 

out of control—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
They started a pogrom.    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
So wait, wait, no—  [OVERLAPPING VOICES]  Christopher’s turn 

to—let Christopher respond—   

Daisy Khan: 
No, I just want to finish the point.  What I’m saying is that had it 

been addressed at the local level it would have never become the 

international phenomenon that it became.  It should be 

addressed at the local level, like Signe did.  When the 

Philadelphia Inquirer decided to publish that same carton, they 

called the Muslim community and said we want to do something 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 54. 

about this and we want to create dialogue.  Now that was 

responsible, that was socially responsible.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Christopher, go ahead.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
When Dr. Samuel Johnson had finished his great lexicography, 

the first real English dictionary, he was visited by various 

delegations of people to congratulate him, including a delegation 

of London’s respectable womanhood who came to his parlor in 

Fleet Street and said Doctor, we congratulate you on your 

decision to exclude all indecent words from your dictionary.  He 

said, “Ladies, I congratulate you on your persistence in looking 

them up.”   [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]  I think anyone who 

understands that story, which I’m pleased to see everybody 

obviously does, will see through the sinister piffle we were treated 

to just now.  If people are determined to be offended, if they will 

climb up on the ladder, balancing it precariously on their own 

toilet system, to be upset by what they see through the neighbor’s 

bathroom window, there’s nothing you can do about that.  

[LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]  The Imams in Denmark did the 

following.  First, they invited the intervention of 22 foreign 

ambassadors in Denmark’s internal affairs, itself a disgrace, and 

the Danish prime minister quite rightly repudiated it.  Then they 

added two cartoons of their own, drawn by them, one of them 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 55. 

showing the prophet Mohammed in the shape of a pig, then they 

shopped those round the Muslim world until they could get 

kindling going under the embassies of a small democracy in the 

capitol cities of countries where demonstrations are normally not 

allowed.    

 

They violated Danish diplomatic immunity, they tried to sabotage 

the Danish economy, there were random pogroms and attacks on 

individual Scandinavians.  And, David Cesarani says he doesn’t 

like the reminiscence of the 1930s that is inscribed in the 

cartoon.  I don’t like the reminiscence of the 1930s that is 

involved in a Kristallnacht against Denmark, put up by religious 

demagogues and thugs, and that’s what needs to be put down.  

[APPLAUSE]    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
David Cesarani.   

David Cesarani: 
I actually agree with much of what Christopher has just said.  I 

think the response in the Muslim communities and in Muslim 

countries, and in countries of large Muslim populations was 

abysmal.  But I will absolutely defend the right of Muslims to 

protest in peaceful ways against those cartoons and to lobby.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
So would I.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 56. 

Philip Gourevitch: 
So would all of us.   

David Cesarani: 
Gooooood, okay, there’s a measure of agreement.   

Philip Gourevitch: 
We all agree—   

David Cesarani: 
Now, let’s see if we can push it a bit further—   

 Philip Gourevitch: 
Wow, you—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Wait, wait, wait, let him finish—   

David Cesarani: 
Just stop interrupting—    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
—we had a beautiful moment of agreement.  [LAUGHTER]  So 

let’s, let’s, let’s let David go ahead.    

David Cesarani: 
You’re an angry man.  Let’s think about this town.  New York, 

New York.  The gentleman there asked the question about who 

are these marginal, vulnerable groups.  It’s kind of interesting 

that a lot of people, certainly on that side, have decided, well, 

Muslim, they’re not vulnerable or marginal, they don’t need 

protection.  If you exclude them, who’s left.  Gay men…women, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 57. 

probably not, Jews, definitely not.  But how do we get to that 

position where gays or Jews in this town, are so strong, so 

powerful, so invulnerable.  So much so that when Jesse Jackson 

had the temerity and the misfortune to refer to this great city as 

Hymietown, it was the end of his political career.  I don’t know 

how Christopher Hitchens or Philip or Signe want to talk about 

gay men and women, but I guess there are quite a few epithets 

and words they would not use—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
I have no idea—    

David Cesarani: 
—to describe their lifestyle or sexual preferences.  Then there’s 

the N word.  The N word.  Do you want it back?  Christopher?  Do 

you want it on prime-time TV, front page of newspapers?    

Philip Gourevitch: 
I don’t want you jailing people for using it—  

David Cesarani: 
Do you want it back, do you want cartoons of lynchings?   

Philip Gourevitch: 
Well, allow me to answer—   

David Cesarani: 
Is that what you want?   

Christopher Hitchens: 
What kind of foolishness is this—   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 58. 

David Cesarani: 
Is it all right to inflict that on Muslims but not on gay men, not 

on Jews—   

 Christopher Hitchens: 
 Don’t be silly—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
You’re being completely preposterous.  All right, no, wait—you’re 

getting yourself all— you’re getting your knickers all in a twist 

here—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Okay, Philip, go ahead, answer—he asked a question, answer his 

question—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
Allow me to say that you’re just creating a lot of fantasies for 

yourself that are quite ridiculous.   

David Cesarani: 
It’s not a—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
No, wait, let, let Philip—Christopher, let Philip—    

Christopher Hitchens: 
I take it as—  

Philip Gourevitch: 
First of all— 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 59. 

Christopher Hitchens: 
I take it—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
Go ahead.  [LAUGHTER]  It’s my turn—  

[OVERLAPPING VOICES]   

Christopher Hitchens: 
I am going to take it as a tribute to the superior cogency of our 

side that there’s this repeated change of subject from the other 

side.  For example.   

David Cesarani: 
No, it’s not the—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Nobody says it would be a good thing if the word “nigger” 

appeared all the time in the press.  What we say is that those who 

want to be offended don’t have the right to close down the 

newspapers that offend them.    

Philip Gourevitch: 
Nor by the way is the reason that word “nigger” doesn’t appear in 

the press because you would jail people who put it there.    

Christopher Hitchens: 
I appeal to anyone in this audience—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
The advertisers wouldn’t show or—   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 60. 

Jeffrey Toobin: 
One at a time—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
I appeal to any—  

David Cesarani: 
Ah, the power of capital!  That’s a good defense.  

Christopher Hitchens: 
I appeal to any male—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
It is.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
I appeal to any male in this audience—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
Quite proud of it.    

Christopher Hitchens: 
—who might see a woman being insulted at work or perhaps on 

the subway or on a bus or on the street or in a bar or in a 

restaurant, by an obscene, loudmouthed man.  There isn’t a man 

in this room I’m sure whose sword wouldn’t flash in his scabbard, 

to defend the rights of womanhood in such a case.  [LAUGHTER]   

If that wasn’t the case, there’s going to be no law that will protect 

women from men with Tourette’s syndrome, I’m awfully sorry to 

say.  [LAUGHTER]   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 61. 

Philip Gourevitch: 
May I have my turn?   

Christopher Hitchens: 
It’s just an attempt to change—   

 Jeffrey Toobin:  
Let’s get another question here—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
I actually want to respond though to what was said—   

 Jeffrey Toobin: 
No, you can’t respond to him, he’s on your side!    

 Philip Gourevitch: 
No, you asked me—  [LAUGHTER]  You asked me to respond to 

David Cesarani.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
No, hold it, let’s let the audience—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
You wanted me to respond to David Cesarani—    

Jeffrey Toobin: 
—get involved here—    

Philip Gourevitch: 
—who specifically was saying that he agreed with us on a point 

which he previously disagreed with us on which is the idea that 

he thought it was appropriate that there should be peaceful 

protests.  However, he objected—   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 62. 

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Philip, really—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
—to the idea that any Jewish leaders in America should 

peacefully protest what was being said by Tony Judd by saying 

that they should not be allowed to put pressure on an 

organization—   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Next—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
—where he spoke.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Stop.   

Philip Gourevitch: 
That’s absurd.    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Philip—  Paul, go ahead, wait, Paul has a question, hold on, hold 

on—   

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
I’d love to ask a question quickly, my name is Paul Holdengraber, 

I’m the Director of Public Programs at the New York Public 

Library.  I feel for this side which is opposed because they’ve been 

so terribly weak and I would be surprised that after this debate 

there are more than two or three people on your side.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 63. 

[LAUGHTER]  But be that as it may, I would like—   

Daisy Khan: 
What makes you think that?    

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Well, I would like to—   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
No campaign speeches, ask a question, Paul.   

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
—simply ask this question of David Cesarani.  I don’t understand 

why on earth you brought up the example of Tony Judd.   You 

mentioned it, you didn’t explain it, you said nothing about it.  

Could you say something cogent about that at least.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Okay.  [LAUGHTER]  David Cesarani.   

 David Cesarani: 
I’ll try and be cogent.  It comes back to the question that 

Christopher Hitchens quite correctly raised.  Who decides on 

these speech issues, on hate speech.  Now, I think that American 

campuses are actually exemplary in this respect, and I think the 

American government has found a way of demarcating what it is 

permissible to say and what is offensive and dangerous, without 

going to law.  I think that sets a precedent of how you can decide.  

I don’t think it is terribly good when powerful individuals phone 

up institutions, and by the tone of their voice have meetings 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 64. 

canceled.  I think there may be very good grounds for objecting 

and protesting, I think it is permissible to lobby.  But I think that 

kind of intervention is not a good idea.  I certainly don’t think 

that we should leave the defense of the weak and the marginal up 

to the advertisers, which seems to be what Philip believes is the 

way to defend our interests.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Philip Gourevitch?   

Philip Gourevitch: 
All I said, that he’s trying to refer to in that bizarre quip, is that 

the reason that you don’t have the word “nigger” or that you don’t 

have a lot of the derogatory images that he was sort of proposing 

in a heated moment that—would you like to see these things 

returned to the public airwaves, ohhhh, was that they’re not on 

the public airwaves not because we’ve actually outlawed them 

and thrown everybody in jail in Austria as you advocate, but 

actually because—   

David Cesarani: 
No, I said—  

Philip Gourevitch: 
—they’re not on the public airwaves.  Because one would not get 

an audience for them because people would protest those stations 

because people would make firm phone calls exercising their 

freedom of speech to say, you know what?  We don’t want 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 65. 

anything to do with you.  You have no basis, I bet, you’ve never 

made a phone call, you’ve never asked a question, and you’ve 

done no reporting to find out whether Abe Foxman made that 

call, which has never been proven.  I sit on the board of Penn and 

we raised the Tony Judd question.  Absolutely nobody could 

ascertain whether or not Abe Foxman made that call.  He may 

have made it, or he may not.  Somebody made the call.  But 

you’re—  

Christopher Hitchens: 
But he does have Tourette’s syndrome—    

Philip Gourevitch: 
—very, very, very confident—  [LAUGHTER]  You’re very, very 

confident in accusing of somebody in public of something that 

you know nothing about—    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Let’s have another question—   

Philip Gourevitch: 
—which is gross ignorance, but no, I would like to finish 

something for a minute, Jeffrey.  I’m not done.  A gentleman with 

a British accent asked a question earlier of David Cesarani which 

he ducked very carefully.  He raised the question, why is it that 

you’re so nervous about the broad public in his criticism of 

Enlightenment thinking and of Mill and of this one and that one.  

He sort of yearns for a clubby time, when you could count on a 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 66. 

few select elites having a kind of common agreement.  And that 

now what’s dangerous to him is the proliferation of voices, the 

idea that there are many ideas out there on the Internet, oh my 

goodness, and we can’t regulate them, and they might get in the 

hands of the wrong people and we can’t even agree who they are.   

For goodness sakes, those clubby people, as they put it, you 

know, even the Jews can have an opinion.  I mean, why are you 

so concerned that there might actually be some unregulated 

voices out there?    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
You know what, let’s just go to a question.    

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
I think that it’s sometimes a lot harder to defend very hateful, 

personal speech, like when hate groups leaflet the lawn of a 

neighborhood where a black family has just moved into a white 

neighborhood.   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
We’re running low on time, so get to a question, please.    

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
But Daisy, do you really think that it’s a problem that we had 

cartoons that were… unfortunately distasteful to Muslim people, 

but cartoons in a newspaper that were quite humorous really, 

and I think they were talking about quite a legitimate political 

issue.  Do you really want to ban that kind of free speech?  You 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 67. 

don’t want to allow editorial cartoons?   

 Jeffrey Toobin:  
That’s a fair question, but we’ve sort of done this question, we’ve 

done the Danish cartoons—  

 Philip Gourevitch: 
We’ve done this question, yes, yes, it’s a waste of a question—    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
I think that’s a good point.  Up there at the top.    

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
I would just like to know, and I’ll be the first to admit that I was 

not aware of this whole discussion about the cancellation of this 

meeting.  But when Mr. Foxman, or if anyone who called and got 

it canceled did so, were death threats part of the reason—   

 Philip Gourevitch: 
Of course not—  

Jeffrey Toobin: 
No, they were not, you know, let’s—   

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Okay, thank you—   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
I mean, let’s put Abe Foxman and Gallileo aside and—  

[LAUGHTER]   

Christopher Hitchens: 
I do have a jot point that I would like to make.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 68. 

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Oh—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
I’ll make it quickly.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Okay, quickly, Christopher.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
After my punch-up with George Galloway recently I was asked by 

the Republican Jewish Committee in Washington to come and 

speak to their ‘do down at the Old Temple and talk about the oil-

for-food program and other things like that.  They put my name 

on the bill, and then a gentleman named Mort Klein who some of 

you will know…  He’s a madman who runs the Zionist 

Organization of America.  He kicked up a terrific fuss because of 

some remarks I’d once made about Theodore Herzl, among other 

things, and got the meeting canceled.    

 

Now, I don’t particularly complain about that as a matter of fact, 

and I don’t share in the tremendous steambath of self-pity that 

Mr. Judd has managed to generate.  [LAUGHTER]  You have a 

right to your opinion.  You don’t have necessarily have a right to 

the audience of the Republican Jewish Committee.  They can 

decide not to have you.  That’s okay.  [APPLAUSE]  I’m just trying 

to say, just for once if we could stop people intruding things that 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 69. 

don’t belong in this discussion, it’d save such a lot of time.  

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Two more questions, this gentleman right here.   

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Where do you draw the line between free speech and political 

correctness.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Another—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
You know, that’s sort of—    

Philip Gourevitch: 
Waste of a question—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
We’ve been dealing with that issue generally, why don’t we get to 

this gentleman over here.   

MAN  
Back here?   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
No, this gentleman in the white shirt, get a microphone.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Stupid, boring questions should be disallowed.    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
No, but we need the microphone for radio purposes though.  You 

can’t speak loud enough so that all of WNYC can hear you.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 70. 

[LAUGHTER]    

 AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Thank you, just a quick question.  One of the things I noticed on 

the panel is that no one talked about the civil rights movement 

and how that’s affected the topic here.  Also, just quite frankly, 

how come there’s no African-American people on the panel?  I’d 

just like to get your thoughts on that.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Next.  [LAUGHTER]    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Well, I mean I think that’s a point that everyone can take for what 

it’s worth.  At the end?   

Philip Gourevitch: 
That was useful for the radio audience—   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
At the top, at the very top, underneath the light.  That’s you, go 

ahead.    

AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Okay, this is a question for Mari.  You talked about women in the 

workforce.  I don’t work on an oil rig, but I do work on a trading 

floor.  I’m just wondering if you think that by limiting what people 

can say to me, if that’s actually protecting me from what people 

are thinking about me, and whether when I come into the office, I 

need to take care of myself.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 71. 

Christopher Hitchens: 
Good.   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Mari?  [APPLAUSE]    

Mari Matsuda: 
I trust that you can.  But there are circumstances in which 

women have left jobs because they could not handle the relentless 

and brutal assaults on their personhood.  This is why in civil 

rights law, to—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Not free expression.    

Mari Matsuda: 
—respond to the earlier question—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
Not a free expression—   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Wait, wait.   

Mari Matsuda: 
The reason in civil rights and anti-discrimination law we do limit 

speech in the workplace, is that ideas about your inferiority, 

about your inherent lack of worth as a human being and your 

lack of entitlement to equality in the workplace, if they’re 

expressed regularly to you, create an environment in which it’s 

impossible for you to do your job on an equal basis with everyone 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 72. 

else.   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Does someone on this side want to address the point Mari’s 

made, which is that there is kind of speech, harassment.  Is that 

speech you seek to protect?   

Signe Wilkinson: 
I get that kind of speech all the time.  One of my favorites was 

being called a liberal cocksucker.  [LAUGHTER]  Now, I don’t 

know whether that means I like to cock-suck liberally 

[LAUGHTER] or I only suck liberal cock or I just am not quite 

sure.  But I didn’t call the police on it.  Furthermore, half the 

people who write me horrible, horrible things, no one has seen my 

mail, they all start it, “Dear Mr. Wilkinson.”  [LAUGHTER]  So it’s 

not me as a woman, it’s the ideas I put in the paper, and if we 

can’t discuss those ideas, even when they talk to me in 

loathsome, funny ways, we can’t talk.    

 

The one thing I would like to say about the whole Danish 

cartoonist thing is this.  Having had that confrontation has 

changed minds on both sides.  The BBC reported that about two 

weeks ago there was another minor dust-up about it.  But the 

reason you didn’t hear about it is because the Muslim side 

realized that it really wasn’t great PR to kill people in Pakistan to 

protest cartoons in Denmark.  So it’s a much different protest, it’s 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 73. 

been handled differently on both sides, including the Danish side.  

This is how we learn.  [LAUGHS]  We learn by conflict, we learn 

by calling each other things that, ehh, well, maybe weren’t a great 

idea at the time, but we can do it differently next time.    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Forgive me for interrupting, but it’s now time to vote.  If you want 

to vote for the motion— everybody’s got their cards—you want to 

tear off the greenish-blue, kind of aqua side.  If you want to vote 

against, you tear off the red side.  If you don’t know where you 

stand, you just put the entire ticket in the box.  Now, can I ask 

everyone to please vote quietly.  The boxes will be passed around.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
How long does this take.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
No, it’s going to go on while you—you’re going to talk while they’re 

doing it.  You can start right away.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
All right.   

Philip Gourevitch: 
Wait.  Who stars?   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
While you’re voting we’re going to go to final statements.  The 

order is, please begin against the proposition, Mari Matsuda.  You 

can stay where you are.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 74. 

Philip Gourevitch: 
We docked some of her time, remember.  We docked some of her 

time.   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Yes, we did dock some of her time.   

Mari Matsuda: 
The “N” word is hollered out from a passing car to let a black man 

know that he is not walking in a neighborhood where he is 

welcome or safe.  The speaker knows the effect of that word, and 

uses it precisely because it terrorizes.  I asked earlier:  why is it 

that we recognize in American law that if someone spits on your 

shoe, that’s an attack on your person, but we won’t recognize 

words that we know, socially, historically, from the reality of the 

human lives that we live, have exactly the same effect on your 

personhood and your ability to move freely?  I am talking about 

liberty and it’s fascinating that we are all coming from the 

Enlightenment tradition.  As much as we disagree, I feel affinity 

with people on the opposing side because we are all concerned 

with losing our democracy and losing our freedom.    

 

I think there are forms of speech that make us less free because 

we stop talking to each other and we don’t have the conversations 

we need to survive.  Allowing this kind of invective perpetuated…  

Daisy has been out on a limb by herself defending the Muslim 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 75. 

community and I have to speak up.  There is hatred of Islam in 

this country and it’s not a healthy thing.  There’s also ignorance.  

We need to open a space where we can talk to each other, 

disagree, criticize, and learn, and that space closes when people 

are allowed to assault.  [APPLAUSE]   I’m not asking for 

censorship, I’m asking that if you support the proposition, you’re 

making a choice for a license to assault.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Daisy, that—   

Mari Matsuda: 
If you oppose it—    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
That’s it—   

Mari Matsuda: 
—you open the door for a conversation about limits.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Okay, next.  Thank you.  that was Mari Matsuda.  Now for the 

proposition, Signe Wilkinson.   

Signe Wilkinson: 
Well, I basically said earlier pretty much what I think here.  I’ll 

just go back to what Christopher said.  This is a conversation.  If 

you forbid someone to say what’s truly on their mind, you won’t 

know what is on their mind.  It’s better almost every time, it 

seems to me, to find out what it is, and then be able to deal with 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 76. 

it.   I think that some of the questions get back to what is truly 

hateful speech and our history is filled with, for example, horrible 

images of black Americans who were made fun of simply because 

they were black, and these images occurred everywhere, in 

Courier and Ives and all of the major publications in the United 

States.    

 

But the way that changed was not by someone saying, you may 

not ever, ever do a bad caricature of a black person.  It was 

changed because the civil rights movement and black Americans 

showed through their own incredible endurance and persistence 

in going for equal rights in this country, that that movement 

made those images look awful.  You can’t look at them today 

without wincing.  It says more about the people who drew the 

cartoons than about who they were drawn by [sic].  I feel sorry for 

you in New York because you don’t have very many really bitter 

cartoons published here, the New York Times protects you from 

that.  [LAUGHTER]   But I really urge you to go on the Web, find 

out what people are thinking, and you’ll find out through 

cartoons among other pieces of free speech.   

Jeffrey Toobin: 
Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  Thank you, Signe Wilkinson.  Against, 

David Cesarani.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 77. 

David Cesarani: 
I think what Signe said then about the struggle of black 

Americans to eradicate racist images from public media was very 

interesting and very important.  It was about equal rights.  There 

was a loss.  There were some cartoonists who made a living from, 

you know, making fun of black people and depicting them in 

ghastly ways who probably went out of business, or just migrated 

to certain parts of America where that sort of thing is still 

tolerated.  Elsewhere, however, the dignity and equality of black 

Americans—as is true of women, gays, and other groups who 

used to suffer demeaning and degrading images and speech 

acts—and the need to create and preserve a civilized, civil society, 

in which civility and respect of one for another is absolutely vital, 

triumphed.  Dignity, equality and civility are values.  They are 

goods.  Our freedom of expression is a value, and it is a good.  On 

this side we’ve simply been asking you to weigh up those values, 

those goods.  We think that human dignity, equal treatment, and 

having a truly civil society is worth a modest, preferable voluntary 

degree of constraint, restraint, a kind of humility.  Knowing where 

to draw the line.  Thank you.   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  David Cesarani.  Now, for the 

proposition, Philip Gourevitch.    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 78. 

Philip Gourevitch: 
The proposition is, freedom of expression must include the license 

to offend.  I would return to the idea that this is fundamentally 

the lesser of various not-ideal prospects.  The other prospect is 

that one licenses someone to determine what offends, and that 

one is always at the prey of that question.  Who is to judge, who 

is to decide, how are we to restrict their ability to license our 

ability to offend.  In other words how are we to restrict their 

ability to restrict us.  At what point does this admittedly slippery 

slope immediately become this greased precipice, and we fall off 

into a very dangerous situation.    

 

The other side says, speech is dangerous, speech can be hateful, 

there’s hatred and ignorance out there, and therefore they want, 

in some way, to muzzle the people they fear are dangerous.  I 

agree with them that speech can be dangerous and that there is a 

great deal of hatred and ignorance out there.  We’ve heard a good 

deal of ignorance even tonight.  I feel that that is why I urge you 

strongly to listen to the dangerous speech you’re hearing from the 

other side, and recognize exactly how it can impinge upon your 

ability not only to speak but to think.  The fact that they keep 

using this strangely castrated phrase, “the ‘N’ word.”  Which is 

supposed to be inoffensive, but is actually doubly offensive 

because it restricts you from the ability to hear the full offense of 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 79. 

the word “nigger.”  They’re at every time trying to double back and 

triple around and make you use words and trip over your own 

mind and not think and not speak what actually might occur to 

you in your effort to observe reality and contend with it.  I think 

that’s a very dangerous predicament, I think that they’re 

presumptuous and wild in their notion that we can do that 

reasonably, and I think that we are at less risk taking the great 

risk of freedom.  [APPLAUSE]    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Thank you, Philip Gourevitch.  Against the proposition, Daisy 

Khan.    

Daisy Khan: 
If all of us here wanted to offend each other, I’m sure we can.  But 

would it be beneficial to building trust, and building long-term 

relationships?  I was stunned at the response I got about my 

rabbi friend.  It is because I had been dialoguing with the Jewish 

community—   

Christopher Hitchens: 
What Jewish friend.   

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Stop.  [LAUGHTER]  Enough.   

Christopher Hitchens: 
What rabbi friend.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 80. 

Jeffrey Toobin: 
[LAUGHS]  Yes, your question has been registered.  Daisy, please 

continue.   

 Daisy Khan: 
It is the deep dialogue that has been going on between me and 

the Jewish community that has resulted in that concern for our 

community.  It is out of that concern that the rabbi friend 

reached out to me and said, do not let this happen to you.  So I 

was a little shell-shocked at the reaction we got from people here.  

As I mentioned, we’re living in a tense global environment, where 

misunderstanding is increased by peddlers of fear, and 

overpowered by intolerance.  Today what is needed is civility, 

tolerance, patience, and sincerity.  We need to get rid of negative 

words like “offend”—it’s a neighbor word—and replace them with 

positive words like “befriend.”   

 

Only once you make the effort to understand the perspective of 

the other person can you begin to understand the rationale 

behind their actions and thoughts.  Furthermore, you’ll be in a 

better position to influence them, and only then can you even 

begin to be critical.  We humans have a nasty habit of judging the 

book by its cover.  If you’re offensive, it is difficult to make a 

difference because you’re seen as hostile, and your views are 

unwelcomed [sic] and outright rejected.  This is human nature.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 81. 

No doubt it is essential to be critical.  But do so at the right time, 

in the right environment, and with the right choice of words.  

Sticks and stones are not the only things that break bones, ladies 

and gentlemen, words do too.  On a personal note, the reason I’m 

here today and I’ve dedicated the rest of my life to furthering 

understanding between peoples has to do with my powerful 

memories of my childhood in Kashmir.  I went to Catholic school, 

was taught by Irish nuns, learned math from Hindu professors, 

played with Sikhs and Buddhists and was told the tale of how 

Kashmiris were from the lost 10th tribe of Israel.  I was exposed to 

this broad perspective of unity and diversity, where celebrating 

and honoring each other’s traditions and beliefs was a way of life, 

but alas, this heaven turned into hell too.    

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Thank you, Daisy Khan, against the proposition.  [APPLAUSE]  

Finally, for the proposition, Christopher Hitchens.    

Christopher Hitchens: 
The real question, or if you like, subtext question before us is 

this—is nothing sacred.  What we’ve really been discussing is the 

old question of whether or not there is such an offense as 

blasphemy or profanity.  Now if I don’t tell you exactly what I 

think about the simpering speeches that we heard from the other 

side, I’m not censoring myself, I’m just being polite and civil and 

saving some of your time.  What I will not prevent myself from 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 82. 

saying, and will not let anyone else prevent me from saying, is the 

following.  It is wrong and always has been for churches, 

powerful, secular, human institutions, to claim exemption from 

criticism, which is what’s really being asked here.  If there’s going 

to be respect, it has to be mutual.  Does Islam respect my right to 

un-belief?  Of course it does not.  Does it respect the right of a 

Muslim to apostasize and change belief?  Of course it does not.  I 

can name now four or five friends—six or eight, maybe, if I had 

time—five or six you would certainly have heard of—who have to 

live their lives under police protection for commenting on Islam.  

For having an opinion on it.  This is getting steadily worse all the 

time, and it’s grotesque.  Here is an enormous religion with 

gigantic power that claims that an archangel spoke to an illiterate 

peasant, and brought him a final revelation that supercedes all 

others.    

 

It’s a plagiarism by an epileptic of the worst bits of Judaism and 

Christianity.  That’s obvious, it seems to me.  [APPLAUSE]  How 

long do you think I’m going to be able to say that anywhere I like?  

It would already be quite a risky thing to say in quite a lot of 

places.  I did not come to the United States of America 25 years to 

learn how to keep my mouth shut.  I’m going to reject all offers 

that I change that policy, however simperingly they are put, okay?  

[APPLAUSE]    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Freedom of expression must include the license to offend” Page 83. 

Jeffrey Toobin:  
Please join me in thanking the debaters for a terrific work.  

[APPLAUSE]  Now it’s time for me to announce the results.  As 

you recall, just to refresh your memory, before the debate was 

177 for the proposition, 25 against, and 24 don’t know.  Now, the 

result is 201 for the proposition, 39 against, 1 doesn’t know.  

[LAUGHTER]  So please congratulate the “for” team for winning 

the debate.  [APPLAUSE]  I’d like to invite everyone to return next 

month for the third Intelligence Squared debate, Wednesday, 

November 29th here at the Asia Society.  The motion to be debated 

there has nothing to do with Abe Foxman or Gallileo.  

[LAUGHTER]  The subject is “A democratically elected Hamas is 

still a terrorist organization,” and it will be moderated by Judy 

Woodruff.  An edited version of tonight’s Intelligence Squared 

debate can be heard locally on WNYC-AM 820, on Friday, October 

27th, at 2 p.m.  Check your other NPR listings for other 

broadcasts outside of New York City.  Please be sure to pick up a 

copy of media sponsor Thursday edition the Times of London and 

a Times Literary Supplement on your way out.  Thank you all for 

coming.   

[APPLAUSE]  

 

END 

 
 
 


