
 
MEDIA TRANSCRIPTS, INC. 
41 WEST 83rd STREET  NEW YORK, N.Y.  10024   (212)  362-1481 

 
FOR The Rosenkranz Foundation/ 

Intelligence Squared US 
 

DATE 4/15/08 

Islam is dominated by radicals 
Moderator:                 Robert Siegel 
For the motion:          Daveed Gartenstein-Ross, Paul Marshall, Asra Nomani 
Against the motion:  Reza Aslan, Richard Bulliet, Edina Lekovic 
 
RESULTS 
Before the debate:                                               
For the motion:  46% 
Against the motion:  32% 
Undecided:  22% 

 
After the debate: 
For the motion:  73% 
Against the motion:  23% 
Undecided:  4% 
 

 

ROBERT SIEGEL  
I’d like to introduce Robert Rosenkranz, who is Chairman of the 

Rosenkranz Foundation which is the sponsor of Intelligence 

Squared and he will frame tonight’s debate.  Bob.  [APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT ROSENKRANZ 
Thank you, Robert.  Thank you very much, and welcome.  Well, 

my task this evening is to frame tonight’s debate, and I frankly 

find it a bit challenging.  Unlike most of our debates, which speak 

to policy, this one is about facts.  Islam has some one and a half 

billion adherents.  Muslims in America seem quite well integrated 

into our society.  Arabs account for only twenty-five percent of all 

Muslims.  The majority are found throughout Asia.   But the 

radical Islamic movement in the Arab world, their doctrines of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 2. 

 
 
 

jihad, holy war, their tactics of terror – that’s what sort of shapes 

our view.  Well, is this view distorted?  The polling data is not 

reassuring.  Consider the following examples.  In Pakistan, 

Indonesia, Morocco and Egypt between seventy-three percent and 

ninety-two percentbelieve that the U.S. goal is definitely or 

probably to weaken and divide Islam.  In the same countries, only 

nine to twenty-three percent believe that the goal of the U.S. war 

on terror is to protect itself from terror attacks.  In those 

countries, around twenty percent of those surveyed supported Al 

Qaeda’s attacks on Americans and more than seventy percent 

agreed with such Al Qaeda goals as deterring U.S. support for 

Israel pushing Western values and Western militaries out of 

Islamic countries and affirming Muslim dignity by standing up to 

America.   

 

And it’s astonishing to note that only between two and thirty-five 

percent of those polled identified Al Qaeda as behind the 9/11 

attacks.  In contrast, twenty to thirty-eight percent identified the 

U.S. or Israel as the perpetrators of 9/11.  And to end on a deeply 

confusing note, in Egypt eighty-eight percent agree that groups 

like Al Qaeda that use violence against civilians are violating the 

principles of Islam, yet sixty percent believe that suicide bombers 

are often or sometimes justified.  Well, what are we to make of all 

of this?  From a geopolitical standpoint, are the radicals the only 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 3. 

 
 
 

ones who matter?  Does their organization, intensity and violence 

effectively intimidate more moderate voices?   Are we engaged, in 

Samuel Huntington’s formulation, in a clash of civilizations?  Or 

is that precisely the characterization that the radicals hope to 

provoke?  I’m confident that tonight’s panel can shed some light 

and it’s my pleasure to turn the evening over to our long-time 

radio host, and the host of NPR’s All Things Considered – Robert 

Siegel.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, Bob.  [APPLAUSE]  Thank you.  And I’d like to 

welcome you to this, the ninth debate of the second Intelligence 

Squared U.S. series.  The resolution that’s being debated tonight 

is:  Islam is dominated by radicals.  And I’m going to give you a 

brief rundown of the evening.  Members of each team will 

alternate in presenting their side of the argument.   Presentations 

are limited, strictly limited, to seven minutes each.  When 

opening arguments are complete, I’ll open up the floor to brief 

questions from the audience, and after the Q&A session, each 

debater will make a final two minute summation.  And finally, 

you will vote on tonight’s motion with the keypad that’s attached 

to the armrest of your seat and I’ll announce your decision on 

which side carried the day.   

 

Let’s begin, though, with a pre-debate vote.  I’d like you to pick up 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 4. 

 
 
 

the keypad that’s attached to the armrest on your left.  And, for 

audience members sitting along the aisle to my right, your keypad 

is attached to the armrest on your right side, next to your 

neighbor’s. Has everybody found their keypad?  Shall we take a 

vote on whether you’ve found your keypad?  [LAUGHTER]  Good.  

Now, tonight’s resolution is:  Islam is dominated by radicals.  

After my prompt, press one to vote for the motion, two to vote 

against the motion and three if you are undecided.  You may 

begin voting now.  [PAUSE]  And I will be informed of and reveal 

the results of your vote later in the evening.  I’d like now to 

introduce the panel, and please hold your applause until all six of 

our panelists are introduced.   

 

For the motion, first, the Vice-President at the Foundation for 

Defense of Democracies, Daveed Gartenstein-Ross; Senior Fellow 

in the Center for Religious Freedom at the Hudson Institute, Paul 

Marshall;  and Professor in the practice of Journalism at 

Georgetown University School of Continuing Studies and former 

Wall Street Journal reporter, Asra Nomani.  Against the motion,  

Assistant Professor of Creative Writing at the University of 

California, Riverside, and Fellow at the University of Southern 

California Center on Public Diplomacy, Reza Aslan;  Professor of 

History at Columbia University, Richard Bulliet;  and Director of 

Communications for the Muslim Public Affairs Council, Edina 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 5. 

 
 
 

Lekovic.  Those are our six panelists.  [APPLAUSE]  First,  

opening statements to be delivered from the podium and the 

order of presentation begins with Paul Marshall, speaking for the 

motion – seven minutes.  With one minute left you’ll hear me say, 

“one,” which will be a warning.    

PAUL MARSHALL 
Good.  Okay, thank you very much for inviting us all this evening 

and thank you for being here.  We in favor of this motion argue 

that Islam is dominated by radicals.  What do we mean by 

radicals?  We mean those who are striving for a political order 

representing a reactionary version of Islam that denies legal and 

civic equality to men and women and also denies it on the basis 

of religion. It also denies freedom of speech and freedom of 

thought.  We believe such trends, such people, currently 

dominate world Islam.  Let us be quite clear about what we are 

not arguing. We are not arguing that Islam itself is inherently 

radical.  Like any other movement, Islam takes different forms at 

different times.  Also, we are not arguing that most Muslims are 

radical.  Most are not.    

 

But what we are saying is that it is the radicals who have their 

hands on the levers of power.  They are, to pick a word, the 

hegemonic.  They’re the most powerful driving force.  They’re 

tending to set the direction and shaping the future of Islam in the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 6. 

 
 
 

modern world.  They do this not because they have superior 

numbers, but because they are extremely focused in what they 

want.  They’re clear about it.  They are often well organized.  

They’re often very well funded, often by Saudi Arabia and they are 

very, very committed, being quite willing to often kill themselves 

and to kill other people, especially Muslims.  So this is what we’re 

arguing.  To illustrate this I just want to show some of the trends 

which we have seen in the world in the last twenty-five to thirty 

years.  Some twenty-nine years ago, of the major Muslim 

countries in the world only one -- Saudi Arabia - maintained that 

its political and constitutional order was a reflection of what it 

regards as original Islam and that it has accepted no foreign or 

infidel accretions.   

 

Saudi Arabia was, and is, one of the world’s most repressive 

states.  Many, many examples could be given but I just mention 

one recent incident when three Saudi intellectuals sent a petition 

to the king –  a petition asking for a gradual move towards a 

constitutional government.  They were charged with using – I 

quote – un-Islamic terminology.  The un-Islamic terminology they 

used in their petition included the word human rights and 

democracy.  So we have the situation of Saudi some thirty years 

ago.  Then in February of 1979, the Ayatollah Komeini overthrows 

the Shah and establishes a draconian regime in Iran, which also 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 7. 

 
 
 

since then has become one of the most repressive regimes in the 

world.   

 

It bars anybody who is not a Muslim from having any authority 

over a Muslim.  It bars Muslims who do not support the regime’s 

version of Islam from running for political office.  One other 

example:  In Iran, if you kill someone who is a member of one of 

the non-listed religions, non-recognized religions – say, such as 

the Baha’is – there is no punishment.  To kill a dog, a cat or a 

Baha’i is the same thing.  It is no matter of the law because they 

have no legal status.  They do not religiously and politically exist.  

Similarly, for sexual relations between a non-Muslim man and a 

Muslim woman, the penalty for the non-Muslim is death.  And of 

course, the penalty for homosexuals of whatever religion is death.  

A new proposed penal code has been presented to the Iranian 

Parliament which would institutionalize its current practice that 

it would require with no possibility of reprieve, annulment that 

the penalty for heresy or for apostasy -- leaving Islam-- is death.   

 

Article 112 of this, this penal code also emphasizes the law will be 

extraterritorial.  This means, incidentally, if this law is in fact 

passed, under Iranian law Barack Obama should be executed as 

an apostate.  With the development of Iran next door to them, the 

Saudis redoubled their own efforts to export their own version of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 8. 

 
 
 

radical Islam.  They proclaim themselves, on many occasions, the 

Muslim Vatican --  a very un-Muslim term -- and now, by most 

best estimates, spend some three billion dollars exporting their 

radical version of Islam around the world.  That’s somewhat 

more, that’s about three times as much as the Soviet Union used 

for ideological purposes at the height of its power.  If one travels 

to a moderate Muslim country, such as Indonesia, or if you travel 

throughout Africa, you will find Saudi-funded mosques, Imams, 

lectures, sermons, students, books, videos, fatwas propagating its 

own reactionary version of Islam.  The Iranians seek to do the 

same.  One result of this, though there are homegrown radical 

movements, with this organizational push behind them, one sees 

the growth of radical Islam throughout the world.  Some 

examples:  when Pakistan was founded it was not founded –  

ROBERT SIEGEL 
[OVERLAP]  One.   

PAUL MARSHALL 
…as an Islamic country.  The Ali Jinnah – the man who founded 

the country --  said, whether you’re a Muslim or you’re a non-

Muslim is no matter of the state.  But now they have introduced 

blasphemy laws, which include the death penalty, particularly 

used on religious minorities.  In Sudan, the government has 

instituted laws and propagated genocidal wars against the south 

in Darfur, killing some two million and two hundred and fifty 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 9. 

 
 
 

thousand, respectively.  In Nigeria, some fifty thousand people 

have died in conflict over the introduction of radical Islam.  We 

see this phenomena repeated throughout the world and one could 

give very many more examples.  One sees it even in, growing in 

Malaysia and Indonesia – historically very moderate countries.  

One result is that in Freedom House’s rankings of the world’s 

twenty un-free countries, the majority now are Muslim.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Paul Marshall, thank you very much for your opening statement, 

in support of the motion --  

PAUL MARSHALL 
[OVERLAP]  Okay, the crucial confluence of ideas is not between 

the West and the Muslim world –  

ROBERT SIEGEL 
[OVERLAP]  -- Islam is dominated by radicals.  [AUDIENCE 

RESPONSE]   

PAUL MARSHALL 
…it is within the Muslim world.  Thank you.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  Now the first opening statement 

opposed to the motion:  Islam is dominated by radicals.  The 

speaker is Reza Aslan.    

REZA ASLAN 
There is something peculiar about the way that this debate 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 10. 

 
 
 

tonight is being worded.  The idea that we could, from our 

comfortable perches here in Manhattan, pass judgment on the 

beliefs and practices of a billion and a half people in every corner 

of the world.  And despite Mr. Marshall’s comments, we’re not 

here to talk about whether Saudi Arabia or Iran is dominated by 

radicals.  We’re here to talk about whether Islam is dominated by 

radicals.  So I suppose it’s not surprising that a large percentage 

of people in this room would believe that Islam – unquestionably 

the most eclectic, the most diverse religion in the history of the 

world – is dominated by radicals.  After all, no field work or 

research is necessary to come to such a conclusion – just turn on 

your television, watch your nightly news.  Now, of course, we’re 

not children in this room.  We all recognize that the purpose of 

commercial news is to sell commercials – which, by the way, is 

why I only get my news from NPR, Robert.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, yes.  [LAUGHTER]  

REZA ASLAN 
And what sells commercials, of course, is violence and terror.  

You all know this.  So then if there are violent protests about, 

let’s say, against deliberately provocative cartoons of the prophet 

Mohammed in a Danish newspaper, that’s a story.  However, if a 

racist politician in The Netherlands makes a movie – we’re talking 

about Geert Wilders here --  makes a movie comparing the Koran 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 11. 

 
 
 

to Mein Kampf and requesting its abolishment in the entire 

country and no protests erupt, the lack of protest is not a story.  

There is simply no story.   

 

Similarly, if the Pope makes some controversial comments about 

the prophet Mohammed and there are mass protests on the 

street, that’s a story.  If the Pope goes to Turkey and no mass 

protests erupt, it’s not that the lack of protests is a story.  There 

is no story.  And I can tell you because I was there with CNN.  Of 

course, much of this debate tonight – and in…and indeed, much 

of the debate about Islam in general is based not only on the 

media but on firsthand anecdotal evidence provided by, 

quote/unquote, insiders.  And I’m sure you’ll hear plenty of that 

tonight from Asra and Daveed.  How the experiences of the 

colleagues for the motion in confronting radicals in their own 

communities has given them the knowledge necessary to judge 

the beliefs and practices of a billion and a half people, I’m not 

sure.  I will say that if I based my views of Catholicism on the 

stories that I hear from my former Catholic friends and on the 

media reports about Catholicism, I’d pretty much have to assume 

that Catholicism is dominated by sadistic pederasts.   

 

But of course that’s not true.  So then I suppose the real question 

here is why do we keep asking pundits and politicians and writers 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 12. 

 
 
 

and public intellectuals what Muslims think?  Why don’t we just 

simply ask Muslims themselves?  This is, after all, not so arduous 

a task.  In fact, the Gallop organization – the most trusted polling 

organization in the world --  has already done the work for us by 

conducting the largest, most comprehensive poll of the Muslim 

world ever done.  According to that poll, a mere seven percent of 

the world’s Muslims – not Arabs – seven percent of the world’s 

Muslims believe that the attacks of 9/11 were justified.  Now, 

more interestingly, Gallop went a little bit further and actually 

asked those seven percent why they believe the attacks were 

justified.   

 

And the responses fly in the face of conventional wisdom.  For 

example, in Indonesia – the largest Muslim country in the world, 

and frankly, quite a pluralistic and successful democracy -- not a 

single respondent, not a single respondent in Indonesia cited the 

Koran as justification for the attacks of 9/11.  Indeed, seventy-

four percent of Indonesians, eighty-six percent of Pakistanis, 

eighty-one percent of Bangladeshis and eighty percent of Iranians 

said that attacks against civilians were, quote, never justified -- 

never.  Now, please compare that to forty-six percent of 

Americans who said the same.  In fact, the Gallop poll found that 

in all Muslim countries the majority of those Muslims who, 

quote/unquote, support violence or what we can refer to as 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 13. 

 
 
 

radical views or tendencies do so for markedly secular – that is, 

political – reasons.   

 

Robert Pape found similar tendencies in his comprehensive study 

of suicide bombing.  He found that ninety-five percent of all 

suicide terrorism is, quote, not driven by religion as much as by 

clear strategic – read, political – objectives.  In short, when we 

talk about radicalism in the Muslim world we are talking about 

political radicalism, which after all, in a globalized world is not 

that odd.  Why are these political goals so often couched in the 

language of religion – and in this case –  

ROBERT SIEGEL 
[OVERLAP]  One.   

REZA ASLAN 
…the language of Islam?  Well, it’s because in every society 

religion holds the most currency with the masses.  In every 

society religion provides a powerful language to create simple 

collective identities and to urge collective action.  In every society 

the language of religion has the power to distill the most complex 

sociopolitical issues into the simplest of choices – good versus 

evil, us versus them.   As I say, this is true of every society, ours 

especially.  And if you don’t believe me, I suggest you ask Karl 

Rove.  Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 14. 

 
 
 

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, Reza Aslan,  for that opening statement.  Now, 

speaking in support of the motion:  Islam is dominated by 

radicals, Asra Nomani.   

ASRA NOMANI 
So I would say assalamu alaykum to all of you, but according to 

the prayer book that I was handed when I went on the pilgrimage 

to Saudi Arabia, I’m not allowed to say this peaceful greeting to 

those who aren’t Muslim.  When I see that headline:  Islam is 

dominated by radicals, I don’t hesitate in believing it to be true.  

The opposite side wants to suggest that we can’t tell you stories 

from the trenches.  But it is, in fact, in the trenches where we 

know what is happening, that we know that the radicals are, in 

fact, intimidating, silencing and paralyzing the moderates.  I 

know it from my lifetime in the Muslim community and I know it 

from stories and anecdotes, sure, and historical and country 

cases.  When I was given this proposition I asked my mother – a 

grandmother, who has taught me my Muslim prayers, who is 

teaching her grandchildren the prayers – I said, Do you think that 

Islam is dominated by radicals?  You can dismiss her as an 

anecdote.  You can dismiss her as somebody who isn’t pundit 

enough but she’s got her finger on the pulse of what’s going on in 

our communities.  And she didn’t hesitate in saying yes.  For the 

last thirty years that I have known, since the exportation of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 15. 

 
 
 

Wahabiism from Saudi Arabia to the far reaches of our Muslim 

world, I know that our community is dominated by radical 

ideology.   

 

I know that it is an ideology that has taken root in countries from 

Pakistan to states in Nigeria to provinces in Indonesia with laws 

that put women in second class status, that give women criminal 

punishments because of sexual crimes.  In each instance you 

could say that there’s a political purpose.  But at the end of the 

day it is done in the name of Islam.  I don’t stand up here and 

condemn my faith.  I fight for it every single day.  I fight for a 

progressive interpretation of our faith.  But at the end of the day 

our religion, our institutional Islam out there in the world -- from 

my home town of Morgantown, West Virginia to Islamabad, 

Pakistan to Indonesia to Riyadh, Saudi Arabia – we are controlled 

and dominated by radical ideology.  The moderates don’t want to 

lose their status.  They don’t want to lose their place in the 

community.  They don’t want to lose their invitation to the 

potluck dinner parties and wedding halls that they get to go to.    

 

It’s an issue of social dynamics.  At the end of the day it isn’t 

worth it to them to take on the radical ideology because there’s 

too much at stake.  You risk your own safety and then you risk 

your social standing.  I know this as a woman in the faith.  I 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 16. 

 
 
 

know that what we are struggling with is a situation where more 

mosques in America than in the 1990s are putting women in 

separate sections.  Two-thirds of mosques in America versus half 

in the 1990s have women separated.  And you could argue that 

that’s not radical ideology.  But at the end of the day it is part of a 

continuum of an interpretation of Islam that takes a literal read 

that says a woman is sexual temptation, that a woman is sexual 

distraction. You take that interpretation and it isn’t that long that 

you have to also add up to an interpretation that says that you 

can’t be friends with the Jews and the Christians, that violence is 

acceptable.   

 

Why do I know this?  Because I’ve heard it from my pulpit.  I’ve 

heard it from the sermons that are downloaded on college 

campuses across this country and across the world.  There is an 

exportation of this ideology.  We may watch our borders, we may 

check the visas of people who come into this country but I know 

that there is an ideology that says that a woman is half the 

witness of a man in criminal cases, that that is law in countries of 

our, of our religion, that there is interpretation that says that a 

woman gets less inheritance.  When we put women -- half of our 

population, in particular -- in second class status around the 

world, you can call it anything you want.  But I consider it 

unacceptable and I call it radical ideology.  It’s unacceptable to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 17. 

 
 
 

have tradition become religion with female genital mutilation.  It’s 

unacceptable to have honor killings, as we are, from Canada to 

Texas to Turkey.  You can call those anecdotes but it’s a trend.   

 

It’s a trend that’s happening because our Islam of today is 

dominated by radicals.  We don’t have mosque leaders who are 

keeping that kind of ideology in check.  We are, in fact, having 

leaders who accept preaching from the pulpit that says that we 

cannot imitate the dis-believers, that we cannot say assalamu 

alaykum to those who are not Muslim.  At the end of the day what 

I want you to know is that I stand up for Islam as a faith.  I stand 

up for the principles just like every other religion.  But like 

Judaism and Christianity have evolved so that there is a 

continuum in institutional religion, so that there is a reform 

synagogue along with the orthodox synagogue, our mosques are 

defined by an institutional puritanical interpretation that to me is 

very radical and very unacceptable.  And I encourage you to vote 

to support this motion because we need a truth telling.  We need 

to be honest.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One.    

ASRA NOMANI  
We need to not cower in the face of political correctness.  A lot of 

you may have hesitation because you think that if you vote for 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 18. 

 
 
 

the motion you are voting and condemning Islam.  I don’t stand 

here before you saying that that is at all on the table.  We can 

stand up for religion that is not dominated by radicals, but we 

can accept the fact when it is.  And in our day, in the trenches in 

the Muslim world from a mosque just a few blocks away from 

here to Seattle, Washington to Dubai, we are facing a momentum 

where the leadership is one that accepts radical ideology and the 

moderates don’t stand up against it.  So I encourage you to vote 

for the motion and understand that it’s a vote for truth.  Thank 

you.  [APPLAUSE]    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, Asra Nomani.  And now, an opening statement 

against the motion from Edina Lekovic.   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
I will bid you assalamu alaykum, because that is what my faith 

teaches me and that, regardless of who is in the pulpit, is what 

the book teaches.  When we consider the question of whether 

Islam is dominated by radicals we have to look in terms of 

absolute numbers and in terms of prominence and in terms of 

symbols.  Saying that Islam is dominated by radicals is much like 

saying, is as absurd as saying that America is dominated by 

murderers.  Certainly they exist within our society and certainly 

radicals exist within the fold of Islam.  But do they dominate?  

Absolutely not.  Based on the polling data that Reza shared with 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 19. 

 
 
 

you and based on so much other data that exists out there, the 

people on the Muslim streets, both in the West and in the, 

quote/unquote, Muslim world, are striving for freedom, for 

freedom of speech, for democracy, for technology, for those very 

things that they admire the West for.   

 

That is what their faith is pushing them to do.  Now, Islam is 

dominated, if you will, by scholars, by average people more so 

than anyone else, who are struggling to understand Islam in a 

21st Century context and who seek to foster inclusion of Muslims 

on the international stage and who want nothing more than to be 

understood and to be respected, as that same poll showed over 

and over again.  To point to Saudi Arabia over and over again, I 

will hand that to the other side.  Saudi Arabia is no, by no means 

the shining glory of any part of the Muslim world.  But pointing to 

pockets in no way reflects the overall picture, the overall reality.  

Looking in a pocket or in many pockets in no way represents the 

overall cost to, the overall character of the people and it is the 

people who define the faith and who define their global 

community.   

 

The reality is that the moral – You know, when we look at where 

this radical threat lies -- I travel across this country and around 

the world.  We can fight anecdotes with anecdotes.  When I was in 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 20. 

 
 
 

Malaysia a few years ago talking to youth on the streets there, 

their single goal was to be understood.  They wondered why 

Americans didn’t understand them and why Americans thought 

that they were all terrorists.  When I traveled to Egypt it was the 

same.  When I traveled even to Bosnia, to the former Yugoslavia 

where my parents are from, it was very much the same.  The lack 

of understanding on both sides of the issue has in many ways 

been fueled by media perceptions as we have described here 

earlier.  The reality on the ground is this:  radicals are failing in 

their attempt to dominate.  Radicals, those who make up Al 

Qaeda and its various branches, are on the run.  They are in 

decline.  Their messages are not reaching the audiences that they 

seek to convert and to brainwash as much as they used to.   

 

And that, to me, is an important symbol of the rise of moderation, 

the rise of the middle, the rise of those who dominate this faith.  

Even those in Al Qaeda – Ayman al-Zawahiri, who recently 

released a tape – they have had to change their tactics because 

they are receiving criticism from within the Muslim community.   

They have had to respond to criticism about targeting civilians 

and have had to answer these questions to the very people that 

they are trying to recruit.  And if we look even at the reality in 

the, quote/unquote -- and I say again, quote/unquote -- Muslim 

world, look even to Pakistan, where we saw that the radicals 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 21. 

 
 
 

indeed killed Bhutto.  But what did the people do in response?  

They elected a secular government.  They responded in a different 

way.  The people on the ground are the ones who are defining the 

face and the nature and the character of the faith and of the 

global Muslim community.   

 

And again, what do they want?  That’s what we have to 

remember.  They do not want death and destruction.  They want 

hope, they want economic ability, they want education and they 

want a seat at the table.  If we also look to the, where the war 

against radicals is taking place, it’s almost entirely in the Islamic 

world, between mainstream societies and governments on the one 

hand and radical minorities on the other hand.  Just look at what 

Muslim scholars and Muslim leaders have been able to achieve in 

the last few years and then we’ll ask ourselves, Why haven’t we 

heard about it?  In 2005 Jordan’s King Abdullah convened an 

international Islamic conference of two hundred of the world’s 

most leading Islamic scholars from fifty different countries.  Those 

scholars unanimously issued a ruling on three fundamental 

issues – the validity of all interpretations of Islam, the eight legal 

schools.   

 

They forbade the declaration of apostasy between Muslims and 

they further provided pre-conditions to issuing fatwas, since they 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 22. 

 
 
 

have become such a currency on the international market and 

have lost their meaning entirely.  That’s one example.  Another is 

that a hundred and thirty-eight Muslim scholars joined together 

to affirm freedom of expression -- scholars from around the world 

– and to condemn the negative reactions to the Danish cartoons – 

and which resulted, I think, interestingly, of the fact that there 

was very little, if – very little reaction to the most recent Danish,  

episode, if you will, of the film Fitna.  And those same scholars 

reached out to the Pope to establish a historic Muslim/Catholic 

forum… 

ROBERT SIEGEL 
[OVERLAP]  One.   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
…seeking opportunities for dialogue that they could do on an 

international scale at the level of leadership and that could also 

be modeled for their citizens and their countries and for the 

faithful among them who wanted to see something different take 

place.  Internationally recognized leaders are calling for 

integration, for tolerance and for advancement.  And their reach 

is ten times wider at least than that of Al Qaeda or any of their 

associates.  Just consider those, even in Turkey, which has 

recently elected a new government but has taken the lead in 

ushering in a historic re-examining of Islamic material to cater to 

the contemporary world.  That is just one among countless 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 23. 

 
 
 

examples of people who are working day in, day out to re-emerge 

as the dominant force within their faith and who are crying out 

for attention on the world stage.  Just consider this last example, 

which is that, what –  

ROBERT SIEGEL 
[OVERLAP]  I’m sorry.  We’ll have to hear the last example later.  

Thank you very much.   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
[LAUGHS]  Where do the cameras turn?  That’s the question.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Edina Lekovic.  Thank you, [APPLAUSE]  Edina Lekovic, for that 

statement in support of the motion:  Islam is dominated by 

radicals.  A couple of questions from me.   Quickly, first for Paul 

Marshall.  Uh, if, as you argue, uh, Islam is dominated by 

radicals, uh, why aren’t Indonesia, Malaysia, Bangladesh, uh, uh, 

or for that matter, hundreds—tens of millions of Muslims in 

India, all knuckling unto, uh, under to jihadist movements, and 

creating Islamic revolutions in those country, why don’t—why 

haven’t we seen more Islamic revolutions.   

PAUL MARSHALL 
Because most Muslims don’t like the radicals’ agenda.  But—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
They’re not dominated by it—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 24. 

 
 
 

EDINA LEKOVIC 
Precisely.  [LAUGHS]   

PAUL MARSHALL 
Well, no, I think if people have guns, if they have intim—if they 

intimidate people, if they’re organized, if they have funding, if one 

sees even in Indonesia the increase in radical movements, radical 

Islam— radical imams, who were not there 10, 20, 15 years ago.   

When you see in Indonesia the destruction of hundreds of 

churches, where 10 years in Indonesia, 20 years ago you 

wouldn’t— would never have seen that, people coexisted.  So even 

in places like Indonesia, in places like Bangladesh, in places like 

Malaysia, even though most of the people don’t want it, you have 

the growth of radical movements, and they often win, because 

they intimidate and scare other people—    

REZA ASLAN 
Paul Marshall—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Okay, more— 

REZA ASLAN 
Paul Marshall knows that those churches are primarily Chinese-

owned, and the Chinese form a socioeconomic community in 

Indonesia that has been at great odds with the majority Muslim 

population there and that a lot of those churches are not religious 

violence.   It’s ethnic, social violence, but more importantly, again, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 25. 

 
 
 

you know, here we go, we’re—we’re talking about this idea of, of 

domination—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
By the way, most of the churches are non-ethnic Chinese.    

REZA ASLAN 
The majority of Christians in Indonesia are Chinese.  Are of 

Chinese ethnicity—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
And you—   

REZA ASLAN 
It is—    

PAUL MARSHALL 
—[UNCLEAR] that Laskar jihad does not justify its attacks that 

way, it, it’s—   

REZA ASLAN 
No, no, of course not—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
—it’s just not a general religious war against Christians—    

REZA ASLAN 
But lots of—but again they don’t dominate—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
It’s just the primary group responsible for, for that violence—   

REZA ASLAN 
But that’s the point—is that, they do not dominate either the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 26. 

 
 
 

discussion about Islam in Indonesia, or the society of Indonesia 

or the government, we’re talking— there’s one country in the 

world—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
I agree with you and Edina that they don’t dominate the 

discussions, the conferences, when people—   

REZA ASLAN 
Then what do they dominate—    

PAUL MARSHALL 
—get together—   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
Right.   

PAUL MARSHALL 
—but those don’t have much effect.    

REZA ASLAN 
No, what, what—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
The people—  [OVERLAPPING VOICES]  —the people with 

professors, every time.    

REZA ASLAN 
What do they dominate—   

ASRA NOMANI 
They dominate actions.  What I thought was really—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 27. 

 
 
 

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Asra Nomani—   

ASRA NOMANI 
—interesting—what I thought was really interesting was that, 

Edina, you even talked about the moderates reemerging as the 

dominant force in the faith, an acknowledgement that they are 

not the dominant faith— 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES]    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
—I want to hear Edina answer the question from Asra Nomani—   

ASRA NOMANI 
I would like to just make the point that, talk is great to point out, 

this is not a popularity contest of what Muslims mostly think.  I 

mean this is about our institutional faith, if you ask me.  When 

we talk about whether Islam is dominated by radicals, 

domination to me is, do they have leadership in our communities, 

and are they taking action that is representative of a violent 

strain of Islam and I’d say yes.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Asra Nomani, thanks, and Edina Lekovic—  Let me ask you a 

specific question—  

EDINA LEKOVIC 
Sure—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 28. 

 
 
 

ROBERT SIEGEL  
—by the way you spoke of Saudi Arabia as a pocket that we 

shouldn’t take as representative any more than murderers in 

America should be representative of American life.  Wouldn’t you 

concede that the role of Saudi Arabia, and Iran for that matter, on 

the global stage, is far disproportionate to their numerical 

position in Islam, they have influence beyond their own borders, 

right—   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
Absolutely, but let’s consider also where that comes from, let’s 

consider the kind of US support that Saudi Arabia also gets in, 

you know, in reciprocity.   

ASRA NOMANI 
But what does—    

EDINA LEKOVIC 
Now in no way [APPLAUSE]  …do I place any sort of validity or 

endorsement on the Saudi ideology.  Is it out there, are there’s 

[sic] Korans out there that we fight problems with, absolutely.   

But even the Saudi people would disagree in large part with what 

their government is doing, and there is no foundation whatsoever 

for the kinds of, you know, of distorted perceptions of faith that 

they’re spreading on the ground.   And that in no way represents 

the global reality of Islam.  Again, looking at pockets and trying to 

turn them into global realities, we have to recognize and reinforce 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 29. 

 
 
 

the majority.   So that is—and that’s precisely what has happened 

since 9-11 which is the point that I was trying to make, that’s 

where the reemergence is taking place.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
We have much more to come, we still have two opening 

statements yet to hear, and we’re going to resume those now, 

speaking for the motion, “Islam is dominated by radicals,” is 

Daveed Gartenstein-Ross.  Daveed.    

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
It’s important before you cast your vote in this debate to think 

carefully about the resolution, and to think carefully about the 

way that we defined it.  As we said in our very first speech, we 

support the proposition that Islam is dominated by radicals, and 

we define radicalism in relation to human equality.  In the 

Muslim world, is there belief in equality between religions?  Is 

there belief in equality between genders?  Is there support for 

basic freedoms, like freedom of speech, and freedom of religion?  

The other side has not addressed these issues.   Instead they’ve 

changed the subject, speech after speech, and defined this 

resolution only with respect to violence.  There’s a reason that in 

neither of our previous two speeches, did we talk about violence, 

I’ll talk about it a little bit here because they’re bringing it up.   

But they haven’t refuted any of our basic arguments about how 

human equality is not being met in the Muslim world.  We’ve 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 30. 

 
 
 

talked about it in two different ways, we’ve talked about equality 

in terms of freedom of religion, and we’ve talked about equality of 

gender and they’ve said not one word on it.   Their last speech, I 

have to say, is a little late to do so.  The reason this is important, 

is because we need to understand the severity of the problem.  

The reason we need to  understand this, is because, if, in fact, the 

Muslim world is dominated by moderates and neo-progressives 

who are going to usher in a new era of prosperity and freedom, 

then there’s not much that we in the West need to do about it.   

But if on the other hand, radicals are ascendant, then we need to 

play a bigger role, and we need to put greater emphasis on this 

corner of the world.  So the way we think about it fundamentally 

matters, and it matters to those who are suffering under 

totalitarian systems.   Now, look at the key areas of the debate.  

Look at freedom of religion.  This is something that affects people.  

In 14 Muslim countries, right now, it is illegal to change your 

religion, in eight of these countries, it is punishable by death.  

That is, you cannot convert out of Islam in these countries.   That 

does not support equality between religions.  This is supported 

also, by anti-proselytism laws, laws that prevent people from 

other faiths from propagating their own faiths, while at the same 

time Saudi money goes out throughout the entire globe, 

propagating a Wahabist version of Islam.  This also is supported 

by anti-blasphemy laws.  Laws that are used to suppress people 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 31. 

 
 
 

who have a view of religion that does not conform with the very 

stringent view that a state might have.  Now they have a couple of 

arguments here.  One argument they made is polls.   Now 

unfortunately, their argument about the polls which is trying to 

give you a broader view, only deals with violence.  Well let’s talk 

about polling a little bit.  One recent poll,  by Policy Exchange 

that was undertaken in Britain back in 2006 shows that a 

shocking 36 percent of British Muslims between the ages of 16 

and 24, said that someone who converts from Islam to another 

faith, should be punished by death.   That’s within the West, you 

get a 36 percent support for this.  Now, 36 percent obviously is 

not a majority.  But what it shows, is the hegemony, as we 

framed it, of radicals, the fact that these ideas are seeping into 

the West, where people are familiar with Western customs, 

Western freedoms, and have had a chance to live in them.  Now, 

the odd—but, and another thing about the polls incidentally, is 

they’re not necessarily as benign as the other side makes them 

out to be.  For example, a recent poll conducted by Pew found 

that 15 percent of Indonesians support—believe that violence in 

defense of Islam is justified.  Well 15 percent isn’t a whole lot.  

But when you look at Indonesia which is the world’s most 

populous Muslim country, you’re talking about 25 million people.  

I find that number to be a bit disturbing.  And it’s out of line with 

what you’d find comparably Christians saying, in terms of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 32. 

 
 
 

whether defense of their faith is justified, whether violence is 

justified, in terms of defense of Christianity.   Now, that is 

relevant to assessing whether this resolution is correct.  Now, 

moving on to other arguments that they made, Edina says, don’t 

look at pockets, people define the faith.   Well that’s non-

responsive, because from the very first speech onward, we have 

said, that the majority of Muslims do not support radicalism.  

Rather, it’s that radicals enjoy hegemony, via institutions, via the 

propagation of the faith.   And Edina actually gives up the game 

in her speech, because she concedes that Saudi Arabia is radical.  

Remember, folks, we’re not talking about Al Qaeda here.  The 

question is not whether Muslims support Al Qaeda, it’s not 

whether Al Qaeda has hegemony, it’s radicals.   And Saudi Arabia 

today, is the biggest country in terms of propagating a view of 

Islam.  And one reason that Reza, uh, feared that I might talk 

about my view from the trenches, is that in a previous 

incarnation before I was in counterterrorism, I was working for a 

Saudi Arabian charity and actually got somewhat radicalized by 

them, it’s in—in a book that you can read somewhere or other.   

But the point is that, I’ve seen Saudi propaganda from the inside.  

And Saudi propaganda does take root.  If you look at countries—

and this is something that Paul talked about in the very first 

speech.  If you look at countries from Bosnia to Indonesia to 

Somalia, countries that for a long time had a very moderate 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 33. 

 
 
 

practice of Islam.   As Saudi money has gone in there, and as 

you’ve had these institutions, these mosques, these charitable 

organizations, the practice of Islam has fundamentally shifted.  

Things are not gonna get better on their own.  Because, look at 

the price of oil.   Saudi Arabia is the world’s biggest exporter of 

oil, in addition to the being the world’s biggest exporter of radical 

ideology.  And the price of oil is skyrocketing.  Over $100 a barrel, 

you have Hugo Chavez and others talking about how it should be 

$200 a barrel.  That’s not unrealistic.   And with this power, with 

this oil money, you’ll see these radical ideas continue to take 

shape.  Saudi Arabia is a powerful country.  In conceding that 

Saudi Arabia is radical, they fundamentally concede that this 

debate is not about Al Qaeda.  It’s about the radical institutions.  

And those radical institutions are indeed taking foot.   She says 

look at the Muslim scholars.  She says that they affirm freedom of 

expression, and condemned the riots over the Danish cartoons.  

But look at what the Organization of the Islamic Conference did, 

the OIC.  In response to the Danish cartoons, they—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One.    

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—pushed for a ban in the UN.  They said that there should be a 

new law to prevent cartoons like that coming up ever again.  

These are cartoons that were published in the West.   And the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 34. 

 
 
 

Islamic countries believe that it’s their right to make sure that the 

West alters its precept of free speech, to conform with norms that 

would be more suitable.  That is why we’re saying, that radicals 

have hegemonic power, and that’s why you should vote for this 

resolution.   

[APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, Daveed Gartenstein-Ross, for that opening statement 

in support of the motion and now speaking against the motion, 

“Islam is dominated by radicals,” Richard Bulliet.   

RICHARD BULLIET 
Good evening.  I think we can agree with most of what our 

opponents have said.  Just not with the proposition.  We can 

agree that Saudi Arabia is not a place that most of us would 

particularly want to live.  Saudis like to live there.  But they have 

a version of Islam, that is repugnant to many Americans, we can 

agree with that.   We can agree that, Saudi Arabia, both privately 

and publicly, puts a lot of money into trying to spread their 

version of Islam, this is what Mr. Marshall referred to as striving 

for a political order that represents a reactionary version of 

Islam—yes. Saudis are trying to do that.   There are some other 

groups, around the world who are trying to do that.  And some of 

them get money from the Saudis.  We’re not going to deny that.  

We’re not going to deny that women in many Muslim countries 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 35. 

 
 
 

face what Asra said was an unacceptable situation.  Yeah, they 

do.   Many others don’t, but many do.  Nor are we going to claim 

that religious equality or enjoyment of human rights as we 

understand them in this country are universal in the Muslim 

world.  We’re not going to complain—to…raise an issue on any of 

this.   But that is what the proposition is.  Proposition is, the 

radicals dominate Islam.  Now we’ve heard other words like, 

hegemony.  After all, as Daveed just said, 36 percent of British 

Muslims think that apostasy deserves death, and that’s 

hegemony—well, not by my count. 36 percent is 36 percent.  You 

want a majority if you want hegemony.  The fact that in Britain, 

virtually all of the Muslims come from one particular, rather 

benighted part of Pakistan—and do not in any way, by any 

measure, represent a cross-section of the Muslim world— should 

also be taken into account.   See, the problem is, and let me go 

back to Mr. Rosenkranz’s very opening remarks.  He was talking 

about numbers that showed that in Muslim countries around the 

world you have a lot of people who are anti-American.   We do, 

yeah.  Well, you know…that I don’t think is un-understandable.  

But the question is whether that has anything to do with Islam.  

Or whether that is objecting to American policies.  Now, if you 

want to say that anyone who objects to US government actions is 

by definition a radical, well then maybe you get somewhere but 

even then I don’t think so because, what has not been talked 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 36. 

 
 
 

about here, is the fact that most of the countries in the Muslim 

world, are not governed by Muslim regimes.   They’re governed by 

autocratic dictatorships.  Most of the political activity of Muslims, 

that gives rise to strong political statements has to do with 

opposing living under totalitarianism.   Most of the people in the 

Muslim world, have not, nor did their parents, nor will their 

grandchildren in all likelihood, had any opportunity, to 

participate in or choose the government under what they live. 

Now, the fact of the matter is, that when they object to autocratic 

rule, two things happen.  One is, that they fall back on their 

religious faith, and say, well, Islam can help us against this 

autocracy, the second one is, they say, who is supporting the 

dictatorships that we live in.  Lo and behold, say it’s the United 

States.  So that when you have Muslims objecting to US policies, 

it’s more frequently that they are objecting to the support the 

United States gives to autocratic rule, whether it is in Egypt, or in 

Saudi Arabia, or in Pakistan.   This is the crux of the matter in 

the Muslim world.  You don’t have…most Muslims in the Muslim 

world are not sitting there trying to decide whether they want a 

Saudi, conservative, Puritanical version of Islam, or whether they 

want, you know, Reza Aslan to be the Muslim pope, I mean this is 

not—  This is not where the debate is, it isn’t about what Islam is 

like.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 37. 

 
 
 

PAUL MARSHALL  
Good debate though.    

RICHARD BULLIET 
Good debate, yeah.  What it’s about, is a billion people, two-thirds 

of whom do not live in democratic systems, and who are looking 

to their tradition and their faith tradition, to try to work for a 

better life, and a more participatory role, in the polities that they 

live in.   And they find that, Islam is satisfying to them as a 

political option.  It isn’t the option that most of us would choose 

but we do know that in this country, we do have many 

Americans, who feel that religion is part of their political life.   

Unless I miss my guess, this accounts for a big chunk of the 

Republican party.  But we sort of say, well, okay, here in New 

York we don’t particularly like to talk about those people, but—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One.   

RICHARD BULLIET 
—nevertheless, the fact of the matter is that these people find 

satisfaction in their turn to religion as an effort to stand up 

against autocracy, and they find that the American support for 

autocrats is reprehensible.   And they discover that in the 

American way of things there will be enormous publicity given to 

anything negative about Islam, not just by the American press, 

but because the various autocrats will feed the American 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 38. 

 
 
 

government and the American press negative things because 

they’re trying to protect the privileged position that they have set 

up over the last 50 years of totalitarian rule.  And therefore I 

would say that, if there’s anything that’s dominating in the 

Muslim world, not dominating in Islam but dominating in the 

Muslim world, it’s dictatorship.  Not radical Muslims.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Richard Bulliet, thank you very much for your opening statement.  

[APPLAUSE]  Before the panelists put questions to one another I 

have a couple of questions, and first, Richard Bulliet.  Would you 

agree or disagree with the statement that Muslim clergy 

worldwide is dominated by people who would want to see Islamic 

law imposed in their societies and would prefer to live in a society 

under Islamic law, do you think it’s true or false or no way of 

knowing.    

RICHARD BULLIET 
Oh, I think that’s false, I held a conference a number of years 

ago, exclusively devoted to Muslim political activists, held it in 

Iman, Jordan.  And one of the issues that we were supposed to 

discuss was the idea of an Islamic republic.  There wasn’t a single 

person there.   

ASRA NOMANI 
They were Muslim political activists—?    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 39. 

 
 
 

RICHARD BULLIET 
Yes they were, they were from the Muslim Brotherhood, they were 

from the Dawa party, they’re from the SCIRI [PH] party.  They 

were from a whole series of Muslim political parties in the Middle 

East.   

ASRA NOMANI 
Mm-hmm.   

RICHARD BULLIET 
And none of them supported the idea of an Islamic republic.   

ASRA NOMANI 
Hmm.   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
And you believe that from a group whose message was the Koran 

is our Constitution—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Daveed Gartenstein-Ross.    

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
I mean, the Muslim Brotherhood is very clear on what their goals 

are.  Hassan al-Banna, talked about this, [UNCLEAR]—  

RICHARD BULLIET 
It was in the 1930s—    

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—Islamic state, and—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 40. 

 
 
 

RICHARD BULLIET 
Yes, but—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—their motto remains, the Koran is our Constitution—    

RICHARD BULLIET 
You’re mistaking the 1930s or the 1950s with the Muslim 

Brotherhood today—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Okay, Mohammed [UNCLEAR]—    

RICHARD BULLIET 
—talks about pluralism primarily.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
I have a question for Daveed Gartenstein-Ross, before—you’ll 

goad each other in just a moment here and I’ll—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Okay—  [LAUGHTER]    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Okay, Daveed Gartenstein-Ross, you seem to cite as evidence of 

the fact that Muslims are dominated by radicals, the desire to see 

restrictions in Europe on freedom of speech that included 

cartoons that Muslims deemed blasphemous.   In Europe, in 

Britain for that matter, there are laws that restrict incitement to 

race hate, which we find a violation of our First Amendment, do 

you believe that laws that ban punishment of racist or anti-



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 41. 

 
 
 

Semitic or anti-Islamist images or literature—that to support 

such laws is a mark of an extremist, or in the context of Europe, 

is it a part of the way in which the law has developed there that 

has not created fascist societies in France, Italy and Britain 

recently—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Well, you have to parse some of those laws, I mean there’s the 

racial incitement laws which is one thing, and I don’t have a 

problem with racial incitement laws.  Then there’s vilification 

laws.  Vilification laws are adopted in some countries, France and 

Italy are examples.   Most countries in Europe do not have it, 

including Britain.  I do think—in terms of those, it’s debatable as 

to why a country would have it, whether it’s evidence of 

radicalism.  But I think saying that every country in the world 

should adopt a certain law to limit speech in the case of religion, 

is evidence of radicalism—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
But if a religious movement pressed for universal laws that would 

ban degrading images or comments about their faith, would you 

take that as per se a mark of extremism on behalf of that faith—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Not—not per se a mark of extremism, I agree with that but I think 

that contextually I would define it as such, it looks like Paul has 

something he wants to—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 42. 

 
 
 

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Paul Marshall, you have something to add—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
Yeah, depends what the government is, you have through the 

Organization of Islamic Confernce an effort going on, since about 

1999, to repress through the international system, to repress 

speech it says is critical of Islam, or blasphemous.  Pakistan has 

been big on this, Iran has been big on this, the Saudis have been 

big on this.   Remember, example, brief example I gave before is 

Saudi democracy activists are accused of blasphemy.  In Iran, 

Akbar Gangi, the major dissident, was accused of insulting Islam.  

Domestically these repressive regimes use charges of blasphemy 

to squelch the opposition, basically they say, we represent Islam, 

you criticize us, you criticize Islam, you’re a blasphemer.  When 

these regimes try to pushy this into the international sphere I 

think it should be strongly opposed.   

RICHARD BULLIET 
But when you have autocratic regimes—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
And Richard Bulliet—   

RICHARD BULLIET 
—that ban parties that use religion and so forth, you don’t object 

to that.  The Egyptians will not allow a religious party, the Turks, 

you know, through constitutional court, they’re now trying to ban 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 43. 

 
 
 

the governing party there, I mean…    

PAUL MARSHALL 
I don’t like that either—   

REZA ASLAN 
A governing—a governing party by the way which calls itself 

Islamist and yet, has brought seven years of unprecedented 

economic growth, has brought Turkey closer to the United States 

and Israel than it’s ever been before, has given more freedoms 

and rights to minorities, and ethnic minorities than it has ever 

been before, but—   They want to say that it’s okay if you’re a 

woman, and you want to go to college, you can put a scarf over 

your head, and, because of that, they’re seen as anti-democratic, 

as violating secularism, as, you know, again this awful world 

Islamist.  So, you know, it’s not so easy to just kind of tag the 

Muslim Brotherhood or the AKP as though the Muslim 

Brotherhood by the way is one entity.  According to something 

that was written in the 1930s, you know, by Hassan al-Banna—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
Well, I’ll quote the current guardian if you want.   

REZA ASLAN 
You can—     
ROBERT SIEGEL  
Well, we can quote them as we go on through the evening.  We 

can quote all of the Muslim Brethren before we’re done, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 44. 

 
 
 

[LAUGHTER] but now, I’m sure you’ve all been wondering what 

the person next to you really thinks about all this.  And now 

you’ll learn because I’m ready to announce the results of the pre-

debate vote.  Before you were moved by the speakers, 

[LAUGHTER]  you were asked your opinion of the motion, “Islam 

is dominated by radicals.”   46 percent voted for the motion, 32 

percent against, and 22 percent were undecided.  Now we’re going 

to continue with the discussion section of the evening.  I’m going 

to ask each of you if you have a question for an individual on the 

other side.   And again, we’d like to hear a question put to the 

person on the other side and first I’m going to ask Paul Marshall, 

do you have a question for one of your adversaries here.   

PAUL MARSHALL 
Yes, Professor Bulliet.  In arguing, you opposed our use of the 

word “hegemony,” and said when, say, 30 percent or so of British 

Muslim youth want to kill someone who rejects Islam, or believes 

they should be killed, you said that’s not a majority, hegemony 

equals majority.   But, would you not agree that in the regimes 

we’re talking about, if one is talking about Egypt, or Saudi Arabia, 

or a vast number of other countries, the majority of the people 

may oppose something.   But surely you would agree that 

currently the Saudi Arabian government is hegemonic, the 

Iranian government is hegemonic in terms of what shapes that 

country.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 45. 

 
 
 

RICHARD BULLIET 
Oh, I agree—  

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Richard Bulliet.    

RICHARD BULLIET 
Yes, I mean—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
No, just stop there—   

RICHARD BULLIET 
The British—  [LAUGHTER]  The British government isn’t, 

however, in that category.  If you are going to say that the 

government in any autocratic state, whether it is Saudi Arabia, or 

Iran or Egypt, or Tunisia, or any of the other myriad autocratic 

states where the government calls the shots, yes.   The 

government does call the shots and therefore you could say that 

the government has a dominating or hegemonic role but if you 

want to go down that route, then you find that most Muslims in 

the world aren’t living in those states that you’re worried about.    

They’re living in states that are governed by nationalists, secular,  

or self-proclaimed secular autocracies, so, you know, you can’t 

just single out Saudi Arabia and Iran, and say, this is the whole 

of the law and the prophets—it just doesn’t work that way.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Question asked and answered,  Reza Aslan, do you have a 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 46. 

 
 
 

question for the other side, someone on the other side.    

REZA ASLAN 
Yes, I’ll ask this question of Daveed.  I want to remind Daveed 

first of all that, according to Freedom’s House definition of 

democracies, the United States wasn’t a democracy until 1960.  

But in that regard, Rice University two years ago did the most 

comprehensive study of American religiosity ever done.   And in 

that study they found that not only do a third of Americans, one 

out of three refer to themselves as evangelical Christians, but 46 

percent, that’s almost half of American Christians, believe that 

the Constitution and American laws should be changed in order 

to match Christian law and Christian values, so—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Your question.    

REZA ASLAN 
—I imagine your response would be—  [LAUGHTER]  No, do you 

or do you not then believe that America is under the 

“hegemony”…of evangelical Christians.  So therefore we are 

dominated by radicals, correct?   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Well—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Daveed Gartenstein-Ross.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 47. 

 
 
 

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—that would be a very relevant and interesting question if this 

were a different resolution.  In the end the resolution isn’t 

whether the US is dominated by radicals or not.  Now—   

REZA ASLAN 
No, I’m just curious about your answer—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Only get one question, yes—    

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
I mean, looking at the specifics of it, it was 46 percent of 23 

percent, I think, I don’t know, that seems to be about, 11 and a 

half percent, my math could be a little bit off, you kind of went on 

for a little while there.  But what I will say is evidence of 

hegemony, is when—   

REZA ASLAN 
No, no, 46 percent of 300 million, not—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
46 percent—   

REZA ASLAN 
—46 percent of 100—    

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—of 300 million think that—well, I’d have to see the study, and 

one thing that I can say is that I think that in the evangelical 

community, which I’m a part of, there’s a lot of push-back 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 48. 

 
 
 

against—  I mean you were, you’re going on and on about the 

AKP, and I actually agree with you on the AKP, I don’t think they 

should be banned.   But there’s a— there’s disagreement here 

but, I don’t think they should be banned—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
No, no, no, I just like Turkey.   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Okay—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
The AKP is the Turkish—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
The AKP is just—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
—Islamist Party—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
But, with respect to the United States, within the evangelical 

community there’s a lot of push-back against religion simply 

being pushed out of the sphere, the public sphere, 100 percent, 

that’s the way the First Amendment has been interpreted for 

some time.   And I would say that some of the disturbing poll 

results are not evidence of radicalism but instead, this push-

back—   

REZA ASLAN 
So it’s not hegemony—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 49. 

 
 
 

ROBERT SIEGEL  
The question—the question is answered—   

REZA ASLAN 
Actually it wasn’t.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
And—well, it’s,—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Actually it was, Reza, but I appreciate your—   

[OVERLAPPING VOICES]  

REZA ASLAN 
It is a sign of hegemony or it is not a sign of hegemony.    

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Um—   

REZA ASLAN 
46 percent wanting to—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Well actually I answered it—    

REZA ASLAN 
—to enforce Christianity—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—[UNCLEAR] which is that the question is not relevant.  And I 

don’t know what way they’d wanna do it, I haven’t seen the poll 

results, I can’t judge.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 50. 

 
 
 

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, Daveed Gartenstein-Ross.  A question now, Asra 

Nomani, you can put a question to one of the opponents of the 

motion.   

ASRA NOMANI 
Well, Edina said earlier that to suggest that radicals dominate--as 

is our proposition there--Islam is like saying that murderers 

define America.  So, 22 countries are the number of countries 

that declare that Islam is the state religion.  Of those, 14 say that 

conversion of Islam is illegal.  The good professor suggested that 

in fact we are correct that, Islamic law in Saudi Arabia and all of 

these other countries suggest inequity.  So my question to you, 

thank you—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Good point.   

ASRA NOMANI 
—is…the laws are defined by ideology that— represents inequity.  

Most of the countries are governed by Islamic states, in the name 

of Islam.  How do you then argue that, there—the excuse is 

autocracies, that the equivalent is as if murderers were running 

America.    

EDINA LEKOVIC 
These countries are not the—the leadership does not even 

proclaim to be running the country in the name of Islam.  Again—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 51. 

 
 
 

ASRA NOMANI 
Well, they have Islam as their state religion—   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
If I can answer—   

ASRA NOMANI 
—under Islamic law.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
You’ve asked the question.  The answer?    

EDINA LEKOVIC 
The Islamic law has been on the books for a period of time in 

these countries.  The leaders who are coming into the leadership, 

are dictators who are following upon the heels of dictators, and 

who are supported by international forces.  The fact that these 

laws exist on the books, are indeed still problematic.  No one on 

our side is denying any of that, these realities certainly exist on 

the ground.  However, we have to look at where they are enforced 

and when they are enforced.  Because even where Islamic law—

and we try to take Sharia and turn it into, as if it’s “the” Sharia, 

that it’s a one-size-fits-all Sharia that exists in all of these 

countries, nothing could be further from the proof.  There is 

different shapes and sizes and flavors of Sharia that exist in these 

different countries.  So we cannot pretend that they are all the 

same.  So, in these situations, in some of these countries, even 

those rules around apostasy have long been unenforced.  We have 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 52. 

 
 
 

to look at where this rise has come from.  And a lot of it, in my 

mind, is a very reactionary action that has taken place.   And 

again, in no way defines what is taking place on the ground with 

the people, I do not know why we are once again, over and over 

again denying the realities of the people on the groined who make 

up the dominant force within Islam.    

ASRA NOMANI 
Because this is not a homecoming queen contest.   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
And no one said it was.  [LAUGHS]    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Edina Lekovic, it’s your turn to put a question to any of the three 

supporters, movers of the motion.   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
Well, my question is for Paul Marshall.  Last week, General 

Petraeus testified before Congress and said that the Iraqi people 

are turning on Al Qaeda, and that they are fighting them, and 

that this is resulting in a reduced presence of Al Qaeda in Iraq.   

And that this is a—and we see this as a rare glimpse of success in 

our war policy.  And pundits, and scholars, including journalists 

who have been on the ground, in some of the very countries that 

we are talking about, have also said that these—   Al Qaeda being 

the prime example, but other radical  groups on the ground,  that 

their influence is also declining.  Do you dispute that fact.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 53. 

 
 
 

PAUL MARSHALL  
Okay.  Just one quick comment, Edina, you are being very unfair.  

As you know, I was on my honeymoon last week, and did not pay 

too much atten—   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
I’m very jealous—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
…the only person who didn’t pay too much attention to what 

General Petraeus said.  [LAUGHTER]  But the… I would be, I 

wouldn’t have enough knowledge of on the ground in Iraq to 

dispute that.   But it may well be the case that sort of more 

radical forces, not just the Al Qaeda types, but the Mahdi army 

and these other groups, that the Iraqis are sort of getting fed up 

with them and resisting them.  This may well be the case.  And, 

obviously, I would regard that, I think most of us would regard 

that as a good thing.  But it would not, for me, make a difference 

in terms of my overall view of dominant trends in the Muslim 

world, in Africa, Asia—south Asia, southeast Asia and so forth.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
A question now, from Daveed Gartenstein-Ross for one of the 

opponents of the resolution.   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
All right, I’m going to ask it to Reza since we seem to be the two 

boxers of the bunch.  And it will—my question will not go on and 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 54. 

 
 
 

on and on, rather, it’s—   

REZA ASLAN 
And I’ll—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—somewhat to the point—   

REZA ASLAN 
And I’ll actually answer it.   

[LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]  

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Touché—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
You both set a very high standard for this event—  [LAUGHTER]   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
It’s really impressive.    

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
So, I’m interested actually in your answer.  You talked about the 

polls on violence during your first speech.  My question is, first of 

all do you still find the raw numbers disturbing, I talked a bit 

about the Pew study on Indonesia, 15 percent equates to 25 

million people who support violence in the name of the religion.   

And then second, do you find it disturbing, regardless of whether 

they name religion as one of their motivating factors for it, which 

was one of the points that you made as well.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 55. 

 
 
 

REZA ASLAN 
Actually what you said was 15 percent of Indonesians would 

resort to violence in defense of their religion, I can’t believe it’s as 

little as 15 percent.  I would be shocked if it were less than 50 

percent.  Religion in every culture including ours, is not just 

beliefs and practices, it’s identity.   And if someone were coming 

to my country to attack me, attack my identity, you’re damn 

right, I would resort to violence to deflect that attack.  Now, you 

made the point that, we would assume that, ask a bunch of 

American Christians that same question and of course it—the 

number would be much less than 15 percent.  I think you’re 

right.  However, let’s ask a bunch of Christians—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
But, pugilistically,  when Andres Serrano’s—   

REZA ASLAN 
Why don’t we—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—Piss Christ came out, Christians weren’t rioting on the streets.  

Whereas with the Danish cartoons you had over 100 people killed 

throughout the world.   

REZA ASLAN 
Yeah, actually Nigerian Christians were massacring with 

machetes Muslims, just as Muslims were massacring Christians.  

But let me just say, it may be right that, you’re not going to get 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 56. 

 
 
 

similar numbers of Christians if you ask let’s say Americans, but 

ask that question of Guatemalans.  Ask that question of people in 

San Salvador.  And I think you’re going to get a different answer.  

Religion is who you are, if who you are is under attack, you fight 

back, period, whether you’re a Christian, or whether you’re a 

Muslim.   The reason that we—there are so few Americans who 

feel that way is—  I mean saying that my religion is under attack 

because I can’t pray in my classroom, is not being under attack.   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
As opposed to there being cartoons ridiculing your religion?  

[LAUGHTER]    

REZA ASLAN 
Yeah, as a matter of fact, yeah, as that’s—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
As a—oh, as a matter of fact, so you do think that it’s okay to riot 

in response to, you think that that’s okay—   

REZA ASLAN 
I think it’s perfectly okay to protest those cartoons.   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
And to kill people?   

REZA ASLAN 
No, but that’s—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Over 100 people died.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 57. 

 
 
 

REZA ASLAN 
No, no, no, but that’s different, what you’re saying is, should I act 

in defense of my religion—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Clearly, to commit acts of violence, it’s not act in defense of 

religion—   

REZA ASLAN 
Should I act—should I act violently—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
It’s commit acts of violence, that’s what the survey said—   

REZA ASLAN 
Should I act violently in defense of my religion, absolutely.  If 

the—if what that means is, that it’s my identity, that people are 

on the ground attacking me—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS  
And this goes to show why Islam is dominated by radicals—   

REZA ASLAN 
It’s sort of—  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]  No.  It’s a very…   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
No, no.    

REZA ASLAN 
It’s just, it’s a—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Sorry, dude, I got the last applause line.  [LAUGHTER]    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 58. 

 
 
 

REZA ASLAN 
It’s a very superficial and unsophisticated view of religion to think 

that what we’re talking about here is if someone is offended by 

something about their religion—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
So the people—   

REZA ASLAN 
—then they’ll react with violence—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—who died should yield to the fact that—   

REZA ASLAN 
When people act—  

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—they’re unsophisticated—   

REZA ASLAN 
When people are acting—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—in their knowledge that they died.   

REZA ASLAN 
When people are asked, would you resort to violence to defend 

your religion, I guarantee you that the people in Indonesia who 

answered that question, were not talking about being offended, 

they were talking about actually defending their lives and 

livelihood which by the way is a very real thing, when you see the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 59. 

 
 
 

war on terror being understood—    

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
It’s also very real in Indonesia—   

REZA ASLAN 
—not just in the Muslim world—  

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—four islands to be directed [UNCLEAR]— 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
One last [UNCLEAR]—   

REZA ASLAN 
—as an attack on Islam, this isn’t just Egyptians or Jordanians or 

Iraqis who think this.  These are British non-Muslims who think 

this.  Around the world, the majority view is that the war on Islam 

is a war against Muslim identity, it’s a—    

ROBERT SIEGEL 
War on terror—    

REZA ASLAN 
It’s—I mean I’m sorry, the war on terror, is a war against Muslim 

identity, this is a—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
On that note—   

REZA ASLAN 
—very real issue.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 60. 

 
 
 

ROBERT SIEGEL  
I think—   

REZA ASLAN 
So if I’m asked…are you—would you react if someone were to 

violate your beliefs, in defense of your beliefs—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Yes.    

REZA ASLAN 
—then we’re not talking about being offended.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
But Reza, you were asked—  

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
That’s not what we’re talking about—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
—and you’ve answered the question.  And we have one last 

question from a panelist for the other side from Richard Bulliet.    

RICHARD BULLIET 
Yeah, I’ll—I think we’ve gotten too serious, we’ll move on to some 

whimsy.  [LAUGHTER]  So this is for Daveed.  You finished your, 

your talk with, what [LAUGHS] struck me as an absolute 

absurdity, namely that the price of oil is somewhat equatable to 

the dominance of radical Islam.    And it made me think, gee… if 

we can only solve our energy problem, will radical Islam go away?  

[LAUGHTER]  Because, you’re making a remark—  The only 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 61. 

 
 
 

person who has ever really pursued this in print was Dan Pipes in 

his first book, saying that, radical Islam is purely a product of oil 

prices—I think it’s an absurdity.    

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Well, it—well, okay, the way you frame it it is, but that’s not what 

I said.  What I said, going off Edina’s remarks that Saudi Arabia 

is radical, is I talked about how the fact—how I used to work for a 

Saudi charity that did propagate radical material.  So I’ve seen 

this firsthand, and can say that Saudi charity, Saudi institutions, 

Saudi imams, make a difference throughout the world.   And the 

reason why they’re so widespread, is indeed because Saudi Arabia 

has a lot of money to spend, due to its oil revenues.  The point I 

was making was simply that oil revenues aren’t going to dry up 

any time soon.   Rather, the price of oil is skyrocketing.  And as a 

result, these institutions are out there, far more than they were 

before.  That goes to the point of hegemony.  That goes to who 

has the power—   

RICHARD BULLIET 
Oh, that—but let’s—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
—who has the money, who’s installing the imams.  And indeed—   

RICHARD BULLIET 
That goes to the point—  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 62. 

 
 
 

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
[UNCLEAR]—   

RICHARD BULLIET 
—of whether the Saudis are trying to export—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
[UNCLEAR]—   

RICHARD BULLIET 
—their form of religion.  And we’re perfectly willing to grant, the 

Saudis are trying to export it, but you haven’t demonstrated that 

the efforts the Saudis are making, are actually succeeding.  All 

you’ve done is saying that they’re doing it—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Okay, but we actually talked about that, Paul talked about that in 

the very first speech.  Where he talked about the changes in 

Islam, in places like Indonesia, in the Balkans, in Somalia, look 

at Somalia.  Where you have a war wracking the country, where 

the group formerly known as the Islamic Courts Union, now 

known as the Alliance for Reliberation of Somalia, managed to 

conquer the country, impose Islamic law in which people were 

arrested for watching Pretty in Pink, in which a karate instructor 

who had female students was arrested, where people were 

arrested for watching the World Cup.   That stuff was unheard of 

in Somalia 30 years ago.  And now—and today, that is the reality 

on the ground.  So I can say for a fact, that yes, this oil money 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 63. 

 
 
 

and this dawa, is making a difference, and it’s making a 

difference in the way that affects people’s lives.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Okay.  You’re probably wanting to get in on this conversation—  

[APPLAUSE]  And now you can join in this civil discourse on the 

question of whether [LAUGHTER] Islam is dominated by radicals.  

We have microphones out in the audience, and if you’d like to 

raise your hand, the people bearing the microphones will find 

you.   I’d like you to please not start to ask a question until  we do 

have a microphone in front of you, and make your questions 

short and to the point.  And if you are member of the press, 

please identify yourself as such.  I’m a little bit blinded by the 

light, so I’m trying to see—  Up in the left, yes, question—    

JAMES TARANTO 
My name is James Taranto and I am a member of the press—  

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Good—   

JAMES TARANTO 
—I’m with The Wall Street Journal.  I—this question is for any or 

all on the side for the motion.  Has the—to what extent has—or 

on the whole let’s say, has, have the political changes in Iraq over 

the past five years strengthened or weakened the domination of 

Islam by radicals.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 64. 

 
 
 

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
In—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
This is Daveed Gartenstein-Ross,  you want to answer that?   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Okay, sure.  I think that the changes in Iraq have had both 

effects.  On the one hand, I think the Iraq war has clearly been a 

rallying point for radicals, and whether that’s justifiable or 

unjustifiable is something that people can decide on their own.    

But clearly, it’s been a great recruiting ground for Al Qaeda and 

others.  The flip-side of that is that, we had some discussion 

before of the anti-jihadist movements that are there, things like 

the Sakwa [PH] movement.  And those have had a cognizably good 

impact.  I think on the whole, uh, the fighting there is something 

that is energizing of radicals in the Muslim world without a 

question.  And that’s not going to stop regardless of the Sakwa 

[PH] movement.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Where is our next question coming from, on the right.   

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 
First of all I think this has been addressed on, pretty much one 

level, “Islam is dominated by radicals” has a multitude of 

meanings.  Not just political, and I was very moved at what Miss 

Nomani said, talking about the—how women were treated in this 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 65. 

 
 
 

religion.  And, I don’t know obviously, I’m not an expert on the 

Muslim religion, but I do know several women in New York who 

go to mosques and are placed in separate areas who cannot go 

out with a man or be seen with a man without a chaperone.  And 

any union has to be…has to be validated by the head of the 

mosque.  —   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Question—  

WOMAN IN AUDIENCE 
—I think, I think—and this, my question is to Edina.  What do 

you think of the absolute bare-bones question of, as I say, 

microcosms grow into macrocosms, of bare-boned questions of 

human rights in that issue.    

EDINA LEKOVIC 
Bare-bones questions of human rights, well…  Okay.  When it 

comes to the issue of women in mosques, what we see—  I can 

speak again anecdotally and I can speak empirically, it’s a matter 

of what the audience would like to hear.   When it comes to 

anecdotal things, you said something about the union of 

marriages, in any church the union of two people must be 

sanctified by that, by that religious institution.  On the question 

of chaperones, there is, it in many ways, is a product of culture 

than of religion.  There is what has been practiced by my family 

for generations is what is then being practiced.   I think this 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 66. 

 
 
 

question of religion and culture and the weaving of the two, is one 

of the central questions that we face within the global Muslim 

community today.  And the reality is that Islam looks and feels 

and tastes different, no matter where you go.   Regardless of who 

is in power, because of the question of culture and of identity that 

we are considering here.  Is there a very real—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Including on the subject—   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
Yeah, is there a very real—    

ROBERT SIEGEL 
—particularly about the women.    

EDINA LEKOVIC 
Is there a very real problem, when it comes to the treatment of 

women in mosques and in human rights issues, absolutely.  Is it 

the dominant force for Muslim women and their lives?  I would 

argue with that point.   Because I, based again on my travels, on 

my experience, and on my interaction with the data that’s out 

there, there are just as many women who are, when they have an 

education, when they have access…   And that’s, again, we have 

dividing lines, we can’t separate the question of human rights, 

when there is a lack of education, where there is poverty, where 

there are these surrounding issues, it is not simply a matter of, 

of, you know, of religious teachings.   Because, there are, you 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 67. 

 
 
 

have the Benazir Bhuttos.  You have the women heads of state in 

Bangladesh and Pakistan and Indonesia and other places.  You 

have Queen Noor of Jordan and Queen Rania, you have these 

other examples that exist out there, and they are just as much 

role models for Muslim women as are the problems that they are 

facing.   These are both—these are two sides of the same reality, 

but absolutely, there’s a very real problem on the ground, and it’s 

one that is being faced by NGO’s, by civil society groups, and by 

women themselves on the ground.   And that’s what I— that’s 

what I’m really trying to put the attention on here.  Is that there 

is an active fight taking place on the ground.  An active fight.    

ASRA NOMANI 
And there has to be a fight because—  [APPLAUSE] There has to 

be a fight, I want to just make the point again—  

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Asra Nomani—   

ASRA NOMANI 
—there has to be a fight because the leadership is dominated by 

radicalism.   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
And by patriarchy—    

ASRA NOMANI 
In— yes, patriarchy is a form of radicalism if you ask me—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 68. 

 
 
 

EDINA LEKOVIC 
As it is in other parts of the—   

ASRA NOMANI 
Sure, but—   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
—non-Muslim world—   

ASRA NOMANI 
Right, but unfortunately, our society, our Muslim society is 

defined right now by a patriarchy that, the Christian and Jewish 

societies have evolved beyond.   

REZA ASLAN 
You’re confused—    

ASRA NOMANI 
Oh, I’m sorry.  [LAUGHTER]  I’m sorry, I didn’t just get censored 

in Dubai because I wanted to talk about women’s rights.  Oh, I’m 

sorry, the mosque up the street didn’t tell me that I couldn’t pray 

in the main hall, because that’s not what a woman’s supposed to 

do.  Oh, I’m sorry, those men that surrounded me—    

REZA ASLAN 
Orthodox synagogues—   

ASRA NOMANI 
Excuse me—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Reza—  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 69. 

 
 
 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES]   

ASRA NOMANI 
—orthodox synagogues are a portion—   

REZA ASLAN 
Catholic churches—   

ASRA NOMANI 
Excuse me—   

REZA ASLAN  
—women can’t become priests—   

ASRA NOMANI 
They’re a portion of—   

REZA ASLAN 
—they can’t serve, you know—   

ASRA NOMANI 
They’re a portion of the Jewish community but the end of the 

day—  

REZA ASLAN 
Absolutely, patriarchy’s—   

ASRA NOMANI 
—orthodox—   

REZA ASLAN 
—everywhere.    

ASRA NOMANI 
—orthodox ideology is what defines our communities.  Two out of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 70. 

 
 
 

three mosques in America do not even allow a woman on the 

board.  That is a statistic—  

REZA ASLAN 
But, from where—   

ASRA NOMANI 
—that is— 

EDINA LEKOVIC 
Whose statistic is that, it’s very—   

ASRA NOMANI 
That’s the Council—   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
—easy to throw these things out there—   

ASRA NOMANI 
—Council on American-Islamic Relations who are, consider 

themselves the NAACP of the Muslim world fighting for women’s 

rights.   I mean this is the reality.  We can talk politics, we can 

talk all sorts of, you know, dictatorships, ultimately, we’re dealing 

with bullies in the community who want to push their radical 

ideology—  

[OVERLAPPING VOICES]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Asra Nomani, but it would be—one could infer from what you’ve 

said that, a hundred—at the start of the last century that all of 

Western civilization was dominated by extremists.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 71. 

 
 
 

ASRA NOMANI 
And have we not gotten at least some movement where we have 

churches now, where we have women as priests.  Where we have 

Catholic women who are—   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
And they’re still fighting—   

ASRA NOMANI 
—fighting for the right to—    

EDINA LEKOVIC 
They are fighting—   

REZA ASLAN 
We have mosques where women are imams, so—   

ASRA NOMANI 
Oh, really.    

REZA ASLAN 
Very small percentage—   

ASRA NOMANI 
I’d love to go to them, in China, in some rural areas, oh, I’ll take a 

trip there but, I don’t think—   

REZA ASLAN 
Oh, no, in the United States—   

ASRA NOMANI 
Oh, really, Reza, tell me where I could go—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 72. 

 
 
 

REZA ASLAN 
Absolutely, there’s a Zaytuna Institute, the only seminar—   

ASRA NOMANI 
Right—  

REZA ASLAN 
—in the United States—  

ASRA NOMANI 
Right—   

REZA ASLAN 
—trains as many women—    

ASRA NOMANI 
Right—   

REZA ASLAN 
—imams as—   

ASRA NOMANI 
Women imams to teach—   

REZA ASLAN 
—as it trains male imams—   

ASRA NOMANI 
—the women.  You know, because they’re acceptable for the 

sisters, but at the end of the day, they’re not good enough for the 

men—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Another que—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 73. 

 
 
 

ASRA NOMANI 
And that to me is unacceptable.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Another question from the audience.  Here, sir.    

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 
I’d like to ask about Islam, from the standpoint of its own 

historical  context, rather than from the prism of our absolute, 

individual standards or mixing the Muslim apple with the 

Christian orange if you will, which doesn’t take us very far.   If we 

begin, say 950 years ago, when Islam was arguably the 

intellectual capitol of the world, since then there’s clearly been a 

trend of insularity and anti-intellectualism in the past thousand 

years, assuming that is true, what has been the trend in terms of  

tolerance, and radicalism, and in particular, not just the last 

thousand years but the last 100 and last 50 years.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Dick Bulliett—   

REZA ASLAN 
You can handle that, Dick—    

RICHARD BULLIET 
I’d like to ask about that, it—you made a statement then you 

said, “assuming that to be true.”  Well, that’s a big assumption.  

You’re talking about 950 years, you’re talking about roughly the 

year 1100.  Right?  Okay.   It is a commonplace—the history of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 74. 

 
 
 

Western culture, that Europe was behind at one point, and then 

at a certain point Islam stagnated and became backward, 

whereas Europe leapt ahead, and created the modern world.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Thanks to Islam, in large part.   

RICHARD BULLIET 
In large part, based on borrowings in one way or another from 

Islam.  But the notion that Islam stagnated is contrary to 

historical fact in certain ways.  In particular, over half of all the 

people in the world today who are Muslims, are the descendants 

of people who converted to Islam after this alleged period of 

stagnation.   Islam’s greatest success, in terms of the growth of a 

faith community, was in the period when Europeans are claiming 

that, uh, that Islam was stagnant.  What happened in that 

period, was that you had an enormous, and very complex, 

interaction of Islam with communities in all parts of the world…   

east Asia, southeast Asia, south Asia, Africa, Europe, Eastern 

Europe and so forth, and Islam became immensely richer and 

more complex, through this interaction.   Now, some people say, 

well, Europe was open to all sorts of new ideas, but in fact Europe 

was open—was open to its own new ideas.  There’s not a single 

major idea in European history that actually came from anywhere 

except Europe.  Because Europe has been a kind of closed—or 

Euro-American society—been fairly closed to the conceptual life, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 75. 

 
 
 

the spiritual life, so forth of other parts of the world.   Islam is 

remarkably open.  And, so I think it’s a question of, if you say 

that all that counts, is who gets rich, and who wins wars, and 

who’s able to set up an imperialist system, then you have one 

argument.  But if you’re talking about the notion of stagnation, 

Islam certainly did not stagnate in that period. This was a period 

of enormous growth and development of complexity and 

intercommunal cross-fertilization.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
We have time for another question from the audience, and, 

somewhere in the, somewhere in the back, I can’t see.   

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Hello.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Hi.   

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  
So according to a 2007 Pew study, over 60 percent of Muslims 

in America identified as moderate, and I was hoping that—   
ROBERT SIEGEL 
Identify as, excuse me?   

WOMAN IN AUDIENCE  
Moderates.  So I was hoping that Asra can elaborate a little bit on 

it, why again are…why is Islam dominated by radicals?   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 76. 

 
 
 

ASRA NOMANI 
Because—  

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Asra Nomani.   

ASRA NOMANI 
Like I said before, I mean this is not a conversation about the 

majority of Muslims.  We’re talking about whether Islam is 

dominated.  Dominated to me means institutional Islam, it means 

the people who are running our mosques, the people who are 

running our—our organizations.   It means, this establishment 

that it call Wahabism Incorporated, that is basically not just, you 

know, a pocket, an empty—an empty anecdote.  It is an empire 

out there in the world that is defining our community.  This isn’t 

a popularity contest about whether we want moderate expression 

of Islam or not.   This is about who’s running our communities.  

And I can tell you that institutional Islam is representing a 

radical ideology that may not represent what most of Muslims 

believe, but at the end of the day, it’s not worth the trouble for 

most Muslims to battle them.   I can tell you from the trenches, 

the struggle to battle that kind of institutional Islam is painful.  

You lose status, you get death threats, you get all sorts of abuse.  

And this is what happens whenever you challenge the authorities, 

and right now the authorities represent radical Islam.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 77. 

 
 
 

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Closing statements from all six panelists now, two minutes each, 

and then we’ll have you vote on these arguments that you’ve 

heard, starting with a panelist against the motion, “Islam is 

dominated by extremists,” Reza Aslan.   

REZA ASLAN 
I guess the question has to be once again, what exactly are these 

radicals dominating—Asra Nomani has said that they’re 

dominating action, that is demonstrably false, because that would 

mean that what we’re seeing in every country in the Muslim world 

is this radical, collective action, which of course takes part in 

political violence, in terrorism, which is simply not true.   I mean 

that’s demonstrably false, that is not the majority of the actions 

that we’re seeing.  Paul Marshall has said that it is the states that 

dis—Islam is, or radicals are dominating, that again is 

demonstrably false.   Besides the fact that one third of the 

Muslim world lives in democracy, the—besides the fact that, of 

the most populous Muslim countries in the world, Turkey, 

Malaysia, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Lebanon, Senegal, these are all 

quite successful democratic states—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One.    

REZA ASLAN 
—and that in those countries that we do see a real sort of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 78. 

 
 
 

movement of political, one could even say radical Islam, they’re all 

in response to secular autocracies in which the mosque is the 

only free space in society, and the only opposition is religious 

opposition.  Daveed has said it’s the institutions that the Muslims 

are radical in, this again is demonstrably false, the Iman 

Declaration, 170 of the world’s leading clerics and scholars 

representing every single sect and schism of Islam came together, 

issued fatwas out—outlawing violence in the name of Islam, 

outlawing calling anyone a takfir or an apostate, the same thing 

happened in the Mecca Declaration a year after that, the same 

thing happened earlier in this year with the king of Jordan.  So in 

every single one of these issues, the idea that something is being 

dominated is demonstrably false.   So we can talk about our sort 

of visions of what Islam brings up, you know, the visions of 

warfare and them.  But the—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Thank you—   

REZA ASLAN 
—fact is when you think about it in its historical sense and its 

factual, objectifiable—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Reza—   

REZA ASLAN 
—observafiable [sic] sense, it just doesn’t make any sense—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 79. 

 
 
 

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, Reza Aslan, for your closing statement, Paul  

Marshall, arguing in favor of the motion.   

PAUL MARSHALL 
Okay, yes, we do argue it is a question of institutions, who is 

controlling organizations.  Course one of those major and the 

most powerful of those organizations, is states.  Though not just 

them.  We’ve spoken not just about Saudi Arabia, we’ve spoken 

about Iran.  Compared to the situation of 30 years ago, whereas 

a— with a radical Islamic regime you basically, just had the 

Saudis, at least a large one.   Then you had Iran.  Then you’ve 

had Sudan.  Then you’ve had radicalization in Pakistan which 

has continued.  You’ve had events in Somalia.  You’ve had events 

in Nigeria.  If you look at places where more radical movements 

are not per se the government, but are increasing influencing it, 

and are more powerful and have established themselves as the 

opposition, we see this in Egypt.   We see this in Algeria.  We see 

this in Malaysia.  We see this in Indonesia.  And in each of those 

countries we see an increase—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One.    

PAUL MARSHALL 
—of violence.  So in each of these settings, compare the situation 

20 years ago, and the situation now.  If you look at movements 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 80. 

 
 
 

amongst Muslims, say amongst the Palestinians, amongst the 

Chechnyans, around Kashmir, in the Philippines, in Thailand, in 

Lebanon…   You’ve had movements that are opposing the 

government.  Usually it was in terms of national liberation or 

political freedom or access to resources.  Now in each of those a 

shift towards a more radical Islamic emphasis.  We see this 

across the board, in setting after setting.   It is now more radical 

than it was then.  Of course there’s a push-back, from Jordan.  

I’ve been involved in some of these conferences.  Similarly with 

Turkey, similarly with Morocco, with Indonesian organizations.   

But they cannot mask—so far, I hope they will—but so far they 

cannot mask the power, the resources, which are arrayed against 

them.  Currently, in the war of ideas—  

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Thank you—   

PAUL MARSHALL 
—within the Muslim world, the radicals are winning.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Paul Marshall.  And now, a closing statement from Edina Lekovic.   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
In the war of ideas, the moderates are the ones who have 

regained the ground since 9-11, both in internationally 

recognized leaders, and in the feelings and the sentiments of the 

people on the ground.  And it is those people on the ground, 1.3 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 81. 

 
 
 

billion of them, who dominate and define the religion of Islam.   

As do the recognized religious leaders who are, as we mentioned, 

time and again, pushing for a new form of tolerance, and more 

and greater dialogue with other religious institutions as well as 

state powers.  Let us not confuse Islamic states, for—and 

misunderstand them as anything other than the two-thirds of 

them that are dictatorships.   The argument on the table is not 

whether the Muslim world is ruled by dictatorships.  It most 

certainly is.  But that is not the question on the table, the 

question is whether Islam itself, and therefore, the global 

population of Muslims, are dominated—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One—   

EDINA LEKOVIC 
—by radicals.  Radicals are failing in their attempt to dominate.  

The moral bankruptcy of the militants as well as their abject 

failure in socioeconomic terms has strengthened the leaders of 

moderate, predominantly Muslim nations, just like Turkey, like 

Indonesia, like Malaysia, in their struggle against religious 

radicalism and backwardness.   Let us remember again the 

people on the ground who make up the dominant force within 

Islam, and who have wrestled back control over their faith and 

are continuing to do so.  Are they the absolute, at—the 100 

percent at this point, absolutely not.   But they make up the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 82. 

 
 
 

dominant side and they say, according to Gallup, that the most 

important thing that Westerners can do to improve relations with 

their societies, is to change their negative views toward Islam, 

and respect Muslims and Islam.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, Edina Lekovic, for that closing statement against the 

motion, now with a closing statement for the motion, “Islam is 

dominated by radicals,” is Asra Nomani.   

ASRA NOMANI 
 “Regain the ground,” “wrestled back our communities,” I don’t 

think so.  A Christian or Jew cannot go into Mecca, because 

you’re banned.  A woman cannot travel in…to Mecca, because of 

the laws of the land that say that she has to have a chaperone.   

The men in our community have decided that in fact their radical  

version of the ideology allows them to, to retain power.  You can 

call it an autocracy, you can call it dictatorships, you can call it 

anything you want, but it is radical and it is dominating our 

communities.   Just look at the example of the South, in the 

1930s let’s say.  Civil rights…  Let’s exchange the words of our 

proposition.  The South was dominated by white supremists at 

that time.  Would they have been the majority?  Maybe not.  But 

they controlled the churches, they controlled the cops, they 

controlled the laws, they controlled the power structure.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 83. 

 
 
 

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One—   

ASRA NOMANI 
That’s what we’re talking about.  Our laws, our power structure, 

our cops, our clerics, are all on the payroll of an ideology that is 

radical.  And it’s an issue of great pain to me as a Muslim, it’s an 

issue of great sadness.  It breaks my heart that this is the reality 

and the truth, and it’s an ugly truth.   But, I challenge you, to 

accept it, because even though it’s ugly, it’s only when we’re 

honest about it that we’re actually gonna be able to change the 

world so that this reality, where Muslims regain the ground and 

take back our communities, will actually happen one day.  It 

hasn’t happened yet.  And, I can only hope that it will happen.   

But right now, we are not, we have not won the war, and the 

struggle continues, and I assure you that we are in the struggle.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Asra—   

ASRA NOMANI 
Thank you.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
—Nomani, thank you.  And now Richard Bulliett, your closing 

statement.   

RICHARD BULLIET 
I have some problem squaring what Asra has just said, with what 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 84. 

 
 
 

Paul Marshall started with.  He started by saying, that…Islam is 

okay, most Muslims are okay.  Like, nothing against Islam, 

nothing against most Muslims.   But that, the people who are 

dominating are those who are striving for a political order that 

represents a reactionary version of Islam.  Now we get to Asra, 

who just says that it’s true there are these dictatorships, these 

are totalitarian states, these are the autocracies, and autocracy is 

radical.   And therefore radicals dominate Islam, well, but that 

radical…you know, that isn’t the radical that Paul’s talking about.  

There is nothing in the government of Syria or the government of 

Egypt or the government of most of the other autocracies in the 

Muslim world, that is in favor of striving for a political order that 

represents a reactionary version of Islam.  In fact, most of these 

governments are—  

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One.    

RICHARD BULLIET 
—dead opposed, to this sort of version of Islam.  They’re trying to 

have what they call secular nationalist states, you can talk about 

the Baath party in Syria, you can talk about the Tunisians, you 

can talk about virtually every country except Saudi Arabia and 

Iran.  But, you can’t get away with the idea of saying that, 

radicals dominate Islam because all—all autocrats are radical.  

That may be true.   But that’s very different from saying that, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 85. 

 
 
 

what’s dominating Islam, which is the proposition of your team,  

is a particular version of Islam.  We can agree, that autocracy is 

the besetting problem of Islam in that many of the reactions that 

you have, come as reactions to autocracy, and, just one word on 

the women.  Every Muslim political group I know that is striving 

to find elections in the Muslim world, believes that all women 

should have the vote equally to men.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Richard Bulliett, thank you very much for your closing statement 

and now, the last of the closing statements, from a supporter of 

the motion, “Islam is dominated by radicals,” Daveed Gartenstein-

Ross.   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
In this debate we’ve defined hegemony in two ways.  We have 

defined it as being hegemony over institutions, and hegemony 

over states.  Now, Richard Bulliett in his last speech finds a 

contradiction, in that he says that the autocratic governments 

aren’t actually Islamic.  Now, here’s a statistic that Asra put 

forward previously in the Q&A, which is important.  About one 

billion of the world’s Muslims live in Muslim-majority countries.  

There are 22 countries, in which Islam is declared the state 

religion.   A look at the numbers shows that about 602 million 

Muslims—that’s 58 percent of those living in predominantly 

Muslim countries—live in places where Islam is the state religion.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 86. 

 
 
 

So, the autocracies are indeed enforcing Islam.  That’s one thing 

that they’re doing.   But it’s not just the autocracies.  It’s the 

institutions.  The institutions are important as well.  And their 

argument, as Bulliett expressed in his last opening speech, is that 

for all the reasons given to you by the other side, vote against the 

motion, it comes down to a question of what hegemony means.  

And the only person on this side who tried to defend—to define 

hegemony, is Richard Bulliett.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One—   

DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS 
Who said hegemony requires a majority.  Well, by that logic, 

everyone on that side has talked about how the US is a hegemon.  

Does that mean that the majority of people in the world are then 

Americans?  Of course not.   The fact is here, that if you look at 

where power is, power is in the hands of those who are trying to 

enforce a particularistic view of Islam.  Look at the institutions, 

look at the anti-apostasy laws.  Look at anti-blasphemy laws.  

Look at the prohibition on evangelism.   Look at prohibitions on 

free speech.  This is not a pretty situation.  And it’s important to 

recognize where the power lies.  That’s what we’re asking you to 

do.  We’re asking you to vote for the resolution, to identify the 

challenges that all of us, all debaters acknowledge, lay ahead.  

And that’s why I would like you to vote for this resolution.  Thank 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 87. 

 
 
 

you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
And thank you, Daveed Gartenstein-Ross for your closing 

statement, and thanks to all of you, it’s now time for you to 

decide who carried the day.  Once again, please pick up the 

keypad that is attached to the left armrest of your seat.  Wait for 

my prompt.   After my prompt, press “1” if you are for the motion, 

and again, the motion is, “Islam is dominated by radicals,”  “2” if 

you are against the motion, or “3” if you are undecided.  Please 

cast your vote now.   

[PAUSE]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
We’re waiting for the bytes and the bits to tally up, and I just 

want to—we’ll wait for the results in a moment, I want to thank 

the debaters first of all, and also the audience for your good work.  

[APPLAUSE]  And before I announce the results of the audience 

vote, before I announce the results of the vote I want to take care 

of a few things.  The final Intelligence Squared US debate of the 

season, will be on Tuesday, March 13th, here at Asia Society and 

Museum—   

WOMAN 
May 13th—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 88. 

 
 
 

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Tuesday, May 13th excuse me.  [LAUGHTER]  We don’t use that 

on the broadcast, do we, so I don’t have to repeat that.  It’ll be on 

Tuesday, May 13th, here at Asia Society and Museum, and the 

motion to be debated is, “We Should Legalize the Market for 

Human Organs.”  But they’ll—   

WOMAN 
Can we come back to that—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
—there’ll be no organs actually legalized during the—  That’ll be 

moderated by the way by my colleague, NPR’s Michele Norris, and 

the panelists for the next debate are, for the motion, professor of 

law at George Mason University Lloyd Cohen; the director of 

transplantation and professor of surgery at SUNY Upstate 

Medical University, Amy Friedman; and resident scholar at 

American Enterprise Institute, Sally Satel.  And against the 

motion the panel will be, the team will be, James Childress, 

professor of ethics at the University of Virginia and director of the 

Institute for Practical Ethics and Public Life;  professor of surgery 

at Harvard Medical School and Director of Medical Affairs of the 

Transplantation Society, Frances Delmonico—  [COUGHS]   

Excuse me.  And David Rothman, a professor of social medicine.  

I have the results but I can’t read it because I’ve lost my voice.  

[LAUGHTER]  And also—  [CLEARS THROAT]  historian David, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “Islam is Dominated by Radicals” (4/15/08) Page 89. 

 
 
 

Rothman, of Columbia University.  So…  Here are the results.  

First I—before I tell you the results—  [LAUGHTER]  An edited 

version of tonight’s Intelligence Squared US debate will be heard 

locally, on WNYC, a wonderful NPR member station, AM 820, on 

Sunday, April 27th at 8 p.m.   Those debates are heard on more 

than 150 NPR stations across the country, please check your NPR 

member station listings for the debates and times of broadcasts 

out of New York City.   After the debate, 73 percent of you said 

you agreed with the motion, that Islam is dominated by radicals.  

23 percent were against, and 4 percent remain undecided.  So 

congratulations to the [APPLAUSE]  team for…  UA big swing.   

Copies of books by the way by our panelists are on sale upstairs 

in the lobby, and you can also purchase DVD’s from previous 

debates here tonight.  Thank you very much.   

  

END 


