
 
MEDIA TRANSCRIPTS, INC. 

41 WEST 83rd STREET  NEW YORK, N.Y.  10024   (212)  362-1481 

 

FOR The Rosenkranz Foundation/ 

Intelligence Squared US 

 

DATE 5/13/08 

We should legalize the market for human organs 
Moderator:                 Ira Flatow 

For the motion:          Lloyd Cohen, Amy Friedman, Sally Satel 

Against the motion:  James Childress, Francis Delmonico, David Rothman 

 
RESULTS 

Before the debate:                                                  

For the motion:  44% 

Against the motion:  27% 

Undecided:  29% 

 

After the debate: 

For the motion:  60% 

Against the motion:  31% 

Undecided:  9% 

 

 

 

IRA FLATOW 

Okay, then I’m going to go ahead and introduce the man 

responsible for this whole shebang here, Robert Rosenkranz, who 

is chairman of the Rosenkranz Foundation, the sponsor of 

Intelligence Squared, who’s going to frame tonight’s debate.  Bob?    

ROBERT ROSENKRANZ 

Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  Well, you know, the notion of a market 

in human organs, just strikes many as ethically or morally 

repugnant.  Certainly those who choose to sell their organs will 

be predominantly poor.   And, is it not exploitation to take 

advantage of their duress?  Doesn’t this make the growing 

inequalities between rich and poor rise to a new and disturbing 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 2. 

 

 

 

level?  Is the human dignity of people who sell their organs 

compromised?   And, and more pragmatically, might the 

existence of a market create incentives for fraud or dishonesty.  

Might it undermine the altruism that drives our current model.  

Well, it’s hard to dispute that the current model has serious 

flaws.  Some 75,000 in this country are on the waiting list for 

kidney transplants.   In the next year, only 18,000 will receive 

them.  Within that year nearly 4000 will die, another 1200 or 

more will become too sick to transplant.  Those on dialysis, have 

a seriously impaired quality of life, and about half the life 

expectancy of those receiving transplants.  The argument in favor 

of a market solution, is grounded in basic economics.  If you 

want to increase the supply of available organs, you need to 

create incentives for donors, is the argument.  The easiest case 

may be a family death benefit, for those who agree to be organ 

donors when they apply for driver’s licenses, and whose organs 

are actually used.   This addresses the need for livers, lungs, 

hearts and other transplantable organs.  But kidney transplants 

are the most common, the only organ available from living 

donors.  The—and this is a case that dramatizes the nexus 

between freedom of contract and personal liberty.   Suppose you 

or your child needs a kidney, and you agree to pay a sum, say 

$25,000, to a donor.  Well in many parts of the world, such a 

sum is life-changing.  Suppose $25,000 enables the donor to get 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 3. 

 

 

 

health care for his parents, or an education for his children.  

Both sides to this bargain receive benefits powerful to them.  And 

there’s no obvious harm to anybody else.  So why should this 

contract be illegal?  When legislators who find such bargains 

repugnant pass laws imposing their views, they are quite literally 

causing sick people to die.  How can this be morally acceptable?  

Before closing, I’d like to note that this is the final debate of our 

spring season, and our final debate at Asia Society.   This has 

been a wonderful venue for us, but all of our debates have been 

sold out and we’ve had to turn hundreds away.  We begin again 

in September at Casprey Auditorium at Rockefeller University, 

66th Street and York Avenue.   Our new venue is substantially 

bigger and will meet the demand for the kind of elevated public 

discourse we at IQ Squared try to provide.  Tonight’s resolution is 

a great example.  It raises issues of ethics and economics, and 

morality, and mortality.   We have an outstanding panel and a 

stellar moderator in Ira Flatow, a veteran NPR science 

correspondent, award-winning TV journalist.  Ira, the evening is 

yours.    

IRA FLATOW  

Thank you, Bob, thank you very much, Bob Rosenkranz.  

[APPLAUSE]  If at any time during the evening you forget what 

we’re talking about, right behind me, is a big billboard…with the 

names of the guests and panelists, we’ve divided them up 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 4. 

 

 

 

into…I’m not gonna say left and right, let’s just say pro and con 

or for and against, for and against is how we’ll describe it.   The 

topic for discussion is, “We should legalize the market for human 

organs,” pro or con, yes or no, and you actually vote, if you look 

at the keypad—there’s a keypad attached to the armrest on your 

left, it should look something like this.   No money is going to 

come out of it if you put in a—  Well, I don’t know, maybe 

something will happen.  Now when I prompt you, we’re gonna 

do—we’re going to take a vote before and then after the debate, 

and see if your mind has been changed or if you have any 

different ideas after listening to the debate.  And so after I prompt 

you, press “1” for the motion, “We should legalize the market for 

human organs,” or “2” to vote against.  And if you’re one of the 

great undecideds, you can even go for “3.”  So it is “1” for the 

motion, “2” against, and “3” if you are undecided.  You can vote 

now.  [PAUSE]   Do I do the “Jeopardy” music here?  I don’t think 

so.  We’re going to reveal the outcome of the votes later in the 

evening, but let’s get right on to the main topic of discussion.   

I’m going to introduce the panel, and, they’re all well-known 

people so please, hold your applause until all six are introduced.  

Now we have for the motion, professor of law at the end of the 

table, at George Mason University, Lloyd Cohen.   He’s Director of 

Transplantation and Professor of Surgery at SUNY Upstate 

Medical University, Amy Friedman—  [BACKGROUND VOICES, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 5. 

 

 

 

LAUGHTER]  Segued too fast to Amy Friedman.   

AMY FRIEDMAN 

Okay.    

IRA FLATOW  

She’s Director of Transplantation and Professor of Surgery at 

SUNY Upstate Medical University.  Next to her is Sally Satel, she 

is a psychiatrist and Resident Scholar at the American Enterprise 

institute for Public Policy Research.  Against the motion on my 

left, we have the Professor of Ethics at the University of Virginia, 

and Director of the Institute for Practical Ethics in Public Life, 

James Childress.  Welcome.  Professor of Surgery at Harvard 

Medical School and Director of Medical Affairs for the 

Transplantation Society, Francis Delmonico.  And on the end, 

Professor of Social Medicine and Director of the Center on 

Medicine as a profession at Columbia University, David Rothman.  

Welcome all to the program, let’s begin the debate.   I’m going call 

each member of the debating team to the podium, in order, and 

they’re going to give us their viewpoint and then we’ll move on 

from there and continue our debate, and first up, in the order of 

debate, for the proposition is Sally Satel.  Sally?    

SALLY SATEL 

Thank you.  Today there are 75,000 people waiting for kidneys.  I 

would still be one of them, but thank goodness, a wonderful 

friend of mine gave me her right kidney two years ago.  But 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 6. 

 

 

 

thousands of others are not going to be as lucky as I was.  In New 

York City in fact, patients suffer on dialysis, can suffer for up to 

eight years before getting a transplant, and so many of them can’t 

survive that long.  Despite decades and decades of public 

education about the virtues of organ donation, the waiting list 

just gets longer, and the time to transplantation just gets longer.  

So it’s no surprise that desperate patients take matters into their 

own hands and try to find their own organs.   They rent 

billboards begging people to give them—to save them.  They join 

on-line matching services to find a donor, in fact I did that.  Some 

of them go abroad, and maybe if they go abroad to a place like 

China, they have to live with the sickening knowledge that the 

organ they got came from an executed prisoner.   But you can’t 

blame these people.  They are just trying to save their lives.  Now 

bless all the altruistic souls who have donated organs.  But it’s 

past time to face the fact that altruism is just not enough.  Many 

people need more of an incentive to give.   And that’s why we 

need to be able to compensate people who are willing to give a 

kidney to a stranger, to save a life.  Here’s one proposal.  The 

government should sponsor a regulated system for living donors.  

Compensation could be something as simple as a contribution to 

a retirement fund, a tax credit, tuition voucher for the children, 

possibly health care, all kinds of creative things we could do to 

benefit people who are willing to give a kidney.   And as I said, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 7. 

 

 

 

since the government will be paying, not the patient, everyone 

can benefit.  Now what about the donors.  Would the promise of a 

reward exploit donors whose poverty makes the offer seem 

impossible to refuse?  That’s an important consideration.   But a 

distinction needs to be made.  It’s not low-income people who will 

rush to judgment, and make rash decisions.  It’s desperate 

people.  No one wants someone giving up a kidney because 

they’re in such financial desperation.  But, this is something we 

can guard against.   For example we simply don’t offer what 

desperate people want.  Which is immediate cash.  So you can 

build in several months of a waiting period, you can offer the 

kind of in-kind compensation I mentioned before.  I mean, I can 

go on and on about details of how a system could be constructed.  

But, you get the idea, I mean you’ve heard the basic idea.  Now, 

what I want to do, is have you hear some of the misguided 

objections that our opponents are going to wage.  You may well 

hear that any effort to legalize rewards for donors, will end up 

creating a system that will look exactly like the corrupt organ 

bazaars that permeate the Third World, in this donors are almost 

considered no more than cattle, and their organs go to the 

highest bidder.  That is exactly wrong.  We are talking about a 

transparent, regulated system of exchange, under the rule of law, 

in which donor protections are paramount.  In fact, what we’re 

talking about is the exact opposite of a black market.  The donor 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 8. 

 

 

 

is free to decide if participating is in his best interest, and then if 

it is, something miraculous happens.  He saves someone with his 

kidney.   You may also hear that the transplant list is really not 

that bad, it’s kind of bogus, it’s inflated.  Really, we don’t have to 

do anything drastic.  Well, we do have to do something drastic, 

because, of the 75,000 people on the list, it is true, not every one 

of them is eligible to get a kidney tomorrow.   About a third of 

them are what’s called inactive, meaning that right now they are 

too sick, if a kidney became available to them tomorrow, they 

would have to be passed over, because they’re not ready to—

they’re too fragile for surgery.   But why did that happen?  It 

happened because they waited years and years and deteriorated 

so far during that time, that now they couldn’t get an organ.  

Tragically these were people who were healthy when they were 

first listed.  So if anything, the glut, the one-third of folks who are 

ineligible to get a kidney today, is a sign for urgency, not 

complacency.  You’ll also hear that the transactions involving 

organs, any transaction involving organs, is an affront to human 

dignity.  But no one can ever explain to me how a fair, safe, and 

respectable implementation of incentives is an affront to anyone.  

But what is a disgraceful assault on human dignity, is to sit by 

and let people die when we have the means to save them.   You’ll 

hear that organs and material gain don’t mix.  Well, I reject this.  

Beautiful acts are performed every day by people who are moved 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 9. 

 

 

 

by a combination of humanitarian and financial motives.  Are 

firemen who rush into a burning building any less heroic in our 

eyes because they were paid to save us?   In the end, our critics 

have a chilling message for patients.  Shut up, wait on line, and 

pray that you’re not one of the 14 people who will die today 

because no organ became available for you.  Now don’t get me 

wrong, altruism is a beautiful virtue.  It should and will continue 

if there is a parallel system—   

IRA FLATOW  

One minute, one minute—   

SALLY SATEL 

—of compensating donation.  I know it’s a beautiful virtue 

because I’m a poster girl for it.  But I also know the deadly 

consequences of following the same failed policy.  It’s something 

we can’t do, and why you must vote for our side.  Thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

IRA FLATOW  

Thank you, Sally.  Up next speaking against the resolution, is 

James Childress.    

JAMES CHILDRESS 

Defenders of markets for organs often charge that the opponents 

of a market appeal to the emotions of repugnance, and disgust, 

the yuck factor.  They often imply that the only grounds any 

reasonable person could have for rejecting a market would be 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 10. 

 

 

 

such emotions.  Well tonight, we, the opponents of an organ 

market, will not appeal primarily to emotions.  Indeed, I suspect 

that the proponents of a market will do so.  Instead we will offer 

solid ethical, social, and cultural reasons not to legalize a market 

in organs.   We ask you to consider very carefully, the reasons, 

the arguments for and against organ markets.  Defenders of 

organ markets also tend to represent an extreme form of what I 

would call market fundamentalism.   They suppose that, any 

time there’s a problem, such as shortage of organs, we should 

just throw that problem into the marketplace, and magically, 

miraculously, the problem will be solved.  Market 

fundamentalism neglects the full range of relevant social values, 

especially justice and fairness which I will emphasize, and the 

probable negative effects of a market in organs, which my 

colleagues will stress.   Markets are truly wonderful mechanisms.  

But they may not be the best mechanism, for organ transfers.  

Defenders of organ markets appeal to two great social-ethical 

values, very important ones.  Liberty, people should be free to sell 

their body parts if they want to.  Utility, a market in organs would 

produce the greatest good for the greatest number.  Libertarians 

affirming liberty, utilitarians affirming utility, take these values 

and join together in an unstable alliance, in support of a market 

in organs.   But both neglect another equally important value, 

justice, or fairness.  As a result they ignore or downplay the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 11. 

 

 

 

injustice or unfairness of exploiting poor and disadvantaged 

people, as sources of transplantable organs.  An illegal or legal 

organ markets, the main vendors or sellers, and yes, that’s what 

they are.  They’re not paid donors, they are vendors and sellers.  

They tend to be poor and disadvantaged, or desperate.  Of course 

we could devise a system of compensation for organs that would 

avoid some injustice and some unfairness, by separating 

procurement from distribution.  Take the unfairness of a rich 

person’s purchase of organs.  We can eliminate that, by having a 

single purchaser of organs, who would then distribute the organs 

according to a fair scheme, for example, to patients most in need.  

But we cannot avoid the poor, disadvantaged, desperate person’s 

sale.  And we should not introduce an organ market into a 

society with major and increasing inequalities in wealth and 

advantage.   If we did so, we would not, should not expect a 

positive outcome.  Why not.  Well consider two possibilities.  One 

possible target of an organ market or compensation system, 

would aim to increase—would be to increase the number of 

organs from dead people.  Let’s call those cadaveric organs.   

Another would be to increase the organs from living vendors.  

Some of the same objections apply to both, for example financial 

compensation may crowd out donation, especially altruistic 

donation.  But there are differences.  Take first a cadaveric organ 

market.   There are strong reasons to believe that compensation 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 12. 

 

 

 

for cadaveric organs won’t increase the supply.  Imagine a 

futures market in organs where individuals contract to provide 

their organs after their deaths, and in return receive a payment 

now, or designate the payment to be provided after their deaths 

to their families, or to a charity.  Why wouldn’t that work, it 

seems so obvious.   Well, consider that many people don’t sign 

donor cards now because of distrust or mistrust.  They worry 

about being declared dead prematurely, or even having their 

deaths hastened, if they have signed a donor card.   Well they 

would certainly be reluctant to enter a futures market, to sign a 

futures contract, when the only barrier to the delivery of their 

organs, is the fact that they’re not dead yet.  Or consider the 

family sale.  Individuals would have similar reasons to block 

families from making decisions because of conflicts of interest.   

And many families would be reluctant to be viewed as profiting 

from a family member’s death.  We do not need to try such a 

futile market.  There are other options for obtaining cadaveric 

organs.  Our current system works fairly well, and can be 

improved.  Indeed, we’re second only to Spain in the number of 

deceased donor organs obtained per million population.  And 

there are several potential improvements that we can make, some 

are already underway.  We can increase education and the use of 

donor cards and donor registries.  And, when an individual’s not 

made a decision, we can do a better job in approaching—



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 13. 

 

 

 

approaching families after their deaths.  Some institutions now 

obtain consent to donation, from 70 to 75 percent of families of 

patients declared dead by neurological standards, who are 

potential candidates for organ donation.  And we can consider 

other sources including those declared dead by cardiopulmonary 

standards.   But now let’s consider a living organ market, mainly 

for kidneys since people can live, usually live and function well 

with only one of their two kidneys.  In 2007 there were roughly 

7250 deceased kidney donors, and 6000 living kidney donors—   

IRA FLATOW 

One minute.    

JAMES CHILDRESS 

A living organ market would probably work better than 

compensation with cadaveric organs, but there are other 

problems that my colleagues will emphasize.  In conclusion…a 

market is not an idea whose time has come.  A market in organs 

is a bad idea.  It is unnecessary, probably ineffective, possibly 

counterproductive, and would breach our sense of justice by 

exploiting poor, disadvantaged, and desperate members of our 

society.  Hence we should not legalize a market in human organs.   

IRA FLATOW  

Thank you, James Childress.  [APPLAUSE]  Up next, for, is Amy 

Friedman.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 14. 

 

 

 

AMY FRIEDMAN 

As a surgeon, I view the body with reverence.  The rights and 

dignity of every patient are paramount.  My expertise is to—is 

sustaining lives by transplanting organs.  It is my inability to do 

so, because I don’t have the organs to offer, that has persuaded 

me that rewarding the donor is appropriate.  Our opponents 

tonight would have me tell patients to stay the course.  Wait with 

dignity for the organ that may never come.   This message is 

poorly received, as it should be.  Our opponents may tell you, 

that the waiting list is too long, because it includes the wrong 

people.  I don’t see wrong people, I see human beings, each of 

whose lives might well be lengthened and improved if I could give 

them an organ.   Desperate patients unwilling to die waiting have 

fueled a black market, whose magnitude is inadequately 

quantified, though certainly disturbing in scope.  What is known, 

is that organs are purchased, third-party brokers siphon funds 

away from donors, and safety is uncertain for both the recipient 

or the donor.   Efforts to shut this market have been as 

unsuccessful as Prohibition was in inducing an end to the use of 

alcohol.  I agree with our opponents that the black market must 

be closed.  I disagree with asking patients to accept death 

gracefully, instead of resorting to the black market.   My position 

is that development of a legal, regulated mechanism for donor 

compensation is the only means of effectively eliminating the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 15. 

 

 

 

demand for this covert activity, closing down the black market, 

and improving safety for donors and recipients.   Today, we 

educate the kidney patient and family, hoping that a volunteer 

donor will step forward to surrender a kidney.  Most transplant 

surgeons agree, there would be no justification for ever removing 

a kidney from a living donor, potentially causing harm to this 

healthy person, if there were sufficient organs from deceased 

donors.    Why?  It may surprise you, that we still cannot tell this 

volunteer donor about all of the risks that kidney donation 

entails.  Sure, the early risks, such as death, are known, but the 

long-term consequences are not, particularly for some of the 

more marginal donors being used in some cases.  Nevertheless, 

we allow and celebrate such a healthy person’s choice to donate, 

and allow him to accept unknown risks for which there is no 

compensation.   Why are we surprised that more donations don’t 

take place?  Transplanters share nearly universal agreement, 

that these genuine heroes need lifelong health insurance and 

intermittent medical supervision.  Dr. Delmonico has written that 

all living donors should be provided with life and disability 

insurance.   But in today’s reality, we have no mechanism for 

providing these protections.  Yet we are not deterred from 

removing the kidney.  The operation itself, and our fees, are 

covered by the recipient’s insurance.  The opportunity to save a 

life persuades us and the donor to proceed.   Compensation for 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 16. 

 

 

 

the organ donor’s time and risks, by providing life insurance, 

lifelong health insurance, and even a direct monetary fee, is more 

appropriate than for the donation of an egg, the rental of a uterus 

for a surrogate pregnancy, or the participation in clinical 

experimentation, all of which are legal.   We are talking about 

saving lives.  Let’s also recognize that everyone else involved in 

the transplant prospers.  The recipient gains the organ, life itself.  

The surgeons, transplant center, and for kidney transplants, even 

the American taxpayer, you and I, have direct financial benefit 

when a patient comes off dialysis.   Isn’t it disingenuous to 

exclude the donor from sharing in the tangible benefits resulting 

from his gift of life?  A reasonable system must include protection 

from nefarious third parties, and be guaranteed by centralized, 

independent oversight, that ensures equal accessibility to those 

in need, regardless of their economic means.   Lastly and most 

crucially, a transparent, informed consent process must be the 

mandatory condition of participation.  Our opponents may 

suggest that payment would be so coerced, as to prevent the 

donor from giving informed consent.  This is paternalistic.  Why 

should financial need prevent one’s ability to consider the 

balanced presentations of risk and benefit that donors consider 

in the currently regulated informed-consent process.  This is an 

insult to the poor, in suggesting they are incapable of balanced 

thought and self-determination.  Reasonable people rationalize 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 17. 

 

 

 

risk daily, by personal prerogative, at times subjecting 

themselves to unhealthy conditions, and making unsafe choices 

such as working deep in the coalmine.   Any informed decision 

balances risk against the prospect of benefit.  Though real, the 

risks of organ donation are likely substantially lower than those 

assumed by coal miners seeking their livelihoods.  Despite the 

dangers inherent in both cases, the miner but not the donor is 

legally compensated for these risks.   The key difference is 

dependence on the participation of medical providers, White 

House are dedicated to doing no harm, to facilitate payment for 

the gift of life.  Therefore, according a donor—   

IRA FLATOW 

One minute, one minute—   

AMY FRIEDMAN 

—the highest degree of protection throughout necessitates the 

involvement of the most highly-trained individuals, and the 

conditions of greatest safety.  This is precisely what does not 

happen on the black market, where transplants and donations 

are conducted covertly.   There is no dignity in dying without a 

transplant.  Don’t blame the patient for listening to his internal 

will to live.  We must offer protection to the donor who answers 

the recipient’s call, in a way that is currently legally prohibited.  

Vote with us to legitimize compensation for the donor’s 

acceptance of risk.   Today, the choice is not whether 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 18. 

 

 

 

compensation will exchange hands, but whether or not 

transplant operations and the sale of organs will be regulated and 

safe.    

IRA FLATOW  

Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  Up next, speaking against the 

resolution is Francis Delmonico.   

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

So I’m a transplant surgeon, and I’ve been involved in 

transplantation care, oh, for more than 35 years.  And, I’ve had 

the opportunity to travel around this world, to know about 

transplantation practices, and what we’re discussing here 

tonight.   I mentioned to Robert, wherever he is, that there’s a 

global impact, of what would be from the United States.  What we 

do here, has a profound influence on the rest of the world.  Now, I 

say that because I’ve been to Manila.  And Amy, I should say, it’s 

not a matter of balanced thought, when a 14-year-old has to sell 

a kidney, to an American that comes there.   It’s not a matter of 

balanced thought in Pakistan, or in Egypt.  What’s been missing, 

in what you’ve heard, is what would that system look like.  

Legalize the market for human organs, what would that be.  Amy 

has mentioned that…shouldn’t be a black market.  Shouldn’t be 

covert.   It’s not a black market in the sense of covert in Manila, 

or in Lahore, Pakistan, or in Egypt.  It’s very well-known.  It’s 

very transparent, and aware what the situation is.  What’s been 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 19. 

 

 

 

missing in the debate thus far is, what would this look like, or 

have to look like, in the United States.  And is that indeed 

attainable.  So, if we are to go down this road of a market, what 

might that be that—we haven’t actually heard, what might that 

be, to make it transparent, or regulated.  Well, there’d have to be 

a fixed price for the kidney.  Now I wanna say something that 

comes across my mind…   [00:33:18:26]  I wish to provide care 

for donors.  There should be no mistaking that, and I wish to 

expand every opportunity there can be, in providing for the 

people on this list.  And that entails care for live donors, that 

does not exist.  But it can’t be a cash payment.  It can’t be a 

market, given the global context of medical tourism and markets.  

So let me take you back to…what would this be.   Well, those that 

have written about this say it would have to be a fixed price.  

There’d have to be a prohibition of brokers.  There’d have to be a 

prohibition of Internet arrangements.  The kidneys would have to 

be distributed along with deceased donor kidneys, by the UNOS 

system.   The kidneys would only be available by this, quote-

unquote, market system.  The vendors and the buyers would 

have to be restricted to the country of residence.  It would only be 

that the vendor could be within the United States, and so too the 

recipient.  Now just for a moment, I want to ask of a reality check 

about all of those issues, and whether or not you all could 

conclude that that in this global environment, of medical tourism, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 20. 

 

 

 

would indeed be attainable.  Do you think that such a market 

could be with a fixed price and a prohibition of brokers and a 

prohibition of Internet arrangements and only distributed 

through this system.  And that the vendors and buyers would 

have to be restricted to the United States.   Now, in the interest of 

time—we can’t go through all of those—let’s just start by thinking 

of that.  Fixed price for a kidney.  Fixed cash payment.  That’s 

impossible.  It’s impossible because there’s no market 

justification to fix a price.   Markets deal in best prices, in 

cheapest prices.  Patients go from the Middle East to Manila 

because it’s the cheapest price.  And, why shouldn’t there be a 

cheap price, if we’re going to condone markets in the United 

States, what is the expectation that insurance companies, 

brokers and patients would simply wait here, why wouldn’t they, 

with now a legalize market in the United States, go and shop.   

Shopping is Manila, shopping is Pakistan, shopping is India.  

Shopping is South America.  There are plenty of cheap prices.  

The prohibition of brokers in this regulated market.  The 

insurance companies become brokers, when they send patients 

from Israel to Manila.   It’s the cheapest price.  About 20 patients 

a month go from Israel to Manila, because of cheap prices.  If 

there’s a market legalized in the United States, in the global 

context of medical tourism, do you think that the 72—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 21. 

 

 

 

IRA FLATOW 

One minute.    

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

—72-year-old patient on the list, would wait for a kidney here, 

versus going to buy a 20-year-old kidney in Manila?  I want to 

bring to attention something about the list, and we’ll do more 

about this and we can amplify this in our discussion.  But there 

is this piece that I want to just very carefully ask--we better 

evaluate this wait list.   The contention that all on the list would 

have lived had they gotten a kidney, may not be a reality either.  

And I’ll wish to amplify that, one other piece…to say that it’s 

unethical not to permit kidney sales because kidney patients are 

dying on the list overlooks the unethical development of 

committing heart and lung and liver and pancreas and intestine 

patients to die because kidney sales will impact deceased 

transplantation in this country.   It does it around the world.  Go 

to Hong Kong.    

IRA FLATOW  

Dr. Delmonico, you—   

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

Thank you, Ira.   

IRA FLATOW 

Sum up.  Thank you—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 22. 

 

 

 

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

We’ll talk more about this aspect—   

IRA FLATOW  

We’ll have more time for discussion later, we’ll have a discussion 

period, we’ll also have a question-and-answer period from the 

audience—   

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

Thank you—    

IRA FLATOW  

—that you can follow up, I have a couple of—  [APPLAUSE]  

Thank you very much.  I just have a couple of follow-up 

questions that struck me, and you made a—raise a couple 

interesting points, folks on this side did also, now I’ll ask one 

question for each side.   And we’ll go on to the debaters.  And 

that is this question about what role do the insurance companies 

have in this, this is a good point that Dr. Delmonico made.  I 

mean, we now have to go to our HMO’s, to our health care 

providers for just—they make just about every decision that 

influences our health care.   Are they now gonna decide whether 

you get a—in your system that you’re proposing—would they 

decide whether you’re able to get a kidney or not, you’re healthy 

enough, you’re not healthy enough, you should be getting one, 

you shouldn’t be one,  I’m not gonna pay for it, I’m not gonna pay 

for the trip, I’m not gonna pay for the medication, whatever, what 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 23. 

 

 

 

role would they have, people are so disgusted with them already, 

are they going to become more disgusted with a government-run 

system, even though it’s regulated.    

AMY FRIEDMAN 

You’re going to ask a physician what role the insurance 

companies should have—   

IRA FLATOW 

Yes, that’s like picking out a—  

AMY FRIEDMAN 

No role.  [LAUGHS]  No, it’s—  You know, in general—   

IRA FLATOW  

Well how is that possible in the system that we have now?   

AMY FRIEDMAN 

Because in general the insurance companies generally follow 

Medicare and government guidelines, and as long as the—we set 

up something that is reasoned, logical and supportable, it’s hard 

for them to not follow.    

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

So do we get to respond to that—   

IRA FLATOW 

No, we’ll get, a little later we get to respond to that.  [LAUGHTER]  

I’m not through with the question yet.   So if everybody acts very 

reasonably then, this will work—do you know anybody who acts 

very reasonably all the time about things like this?    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 24. 

 

 

 

AMY FRIEDMAN  

Well I—I shouldn’t comment on that.  But I will say that, you 

know, the concept of how this system would be created requires, 

um, involvement of multiple parties, in a similar manner to the 

way UNOS is set up.  That there are not just providers, there are 

not just patients and family members, there are clergy, there are 

social workers, and yes, I think it would be reasonable to have 

some representatives from the major insurance companies for 

example to be part in the development of these multi-disciplinary 

panels as they agree on what is the best policy for doing this.  It 

has to be a uniform policy, and the way the law would need to be 

written, and we do need a law written, this is obviously currently 

an illegal activity, so we definitely need legislative change, would 

be to require that these activities go through the single processor.   

IRA FLATOW  

Let me just ask the other doctor, Dr. Delmonico, a different 

question, we’ll get back to this later, you seem to feel very 

strongly about this issue.  Do you think this is a strong enough 

issue that it should be brought up in this Presidential election 

year.  Do you think this should influence the way we choose our 

candidates about where they stand perhaps, on this issue.   

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

Fine, yes I do.  [LAUGHTER]  I think that…here’s how I think it.  

Medical tourism is going to be a very important aspect for all of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 25. 

 

 

 

us in this room.  Countries are now seeking rich patients to come 

to that country for care.  It becomes a very big industry.  And, the 

social inequity of that is, on two ways.  If you go to a South 

American country that is attracting patients to come there, they 

do so by then making it—patients within that country, unable to 

receive that care.   Because there is an internal brain drain of 

sort, that is intended for the rich patients to arrive there.  

Deceased donation has been impacted in the Middle East, 

because you can go to Asia to buy a kidney.  So, in this global 

context of medical tourism, I think our Presidential candidates 

are gonna have to think about this, yes indeed.   

IRA FLATOW  

Good questions, if we ever ask them a question about science or 

health, you know, if we ever get a chance.  Okay, we’re going to—

we have to move on—we have topics of discussion coming up 

later.  Don’t shoot the messenger.  We have to move right along 

here, next up for the resolution is, Lloyd Cohen.    

LLOYD COHEN 

Ladies and gentlemen, I want to make the question before you as 

authentic and personal as possible.  Imagine that when you leave 

here tonight, you learn that your child’s kidneys are failing and 

that without a transplant she will die.  The problem for you is 

how to obtain an organ for her.  She could receive one from a 

living donor, but she—and both she and the donor can live quite 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 26. 

 

 

 

well with one healthy kidney.  But what if no relative or friend is 

both compatible and willing to donate.   Well, you look to be, a 

reasonably well-heeled, group, so perhaps you might pay 

someone to supply her this superfluous kidney, and thereby save 

your child’s life.  Alas, that would be illegal.  You, the vendor, and 

anyone who aids you in this will be subjected to imprisonment.   

Odd, isn’t it.  That if she were attacked by an assailant, you are 

permitted to use deadly force to save her life.  But when she is 

attacked by disease, you may not pay a willing vendor to provide 

an organ.  Perhaps this rests on the principle that the rich should 

not get what the poor are precluded from obtaining.   Well then.  

A private charity or government agency should step in and 

purchase organs from willing donors, and distribute them on the 

basis of need.  No.  That is also forbidden.  No one, no institution, 

no government agency may pay a living donor.  Well then, 

perhaps she can receive a deceased donor organ.   Yes, if she is 

lucky.  Now as it happens something between 25 percent and 60 

percent of organs suitable for transplantation, are recovered from 

the deceased.  What happens to the rest.  They are buried and 

burned.  Why doesn’t a private party or a charity or the 

government step in and purchase those life-saving organs.   

Bizarre as this may sound, the law draws no distinctions between 

organs from the living and organs from the deceased.  Here too, 

offering or accepting compensation for a deceased donor organ, is 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 27. 

 

 

 

a felony.  Our position, is not that every conceivable market in 

human organs is ethically acceptable.   Rather, it is that at least 

some are.  Our opponents on the other hand, object to, and 

would prohibit, any and all personal reward being offered to 

providers of organs.  They oppose payments for living donation.  

They oppose payments to next of kin for the organs of a deceased 

relative.   They propose offering an options contract to healthy 

people for delivery of their organs after death.  They even oppose 

the life-sharer system of giving a priority to transplant organs, to 

those willing to make the commitment to their own deceased 

organ donation.   Though in this debate we are not arguing in 

favor of any particular proposal to reward providers, I will outline 

one such proposal, the one with which I am most closely 

associated—an options market in deceased donor organs.  I do so 

in part because I crafted his proposal precisely to try to 

accommodate every ethical objection I had heard, whether I 

thought it worthy or not.  I leave it to you to judge if there is any 

substantial ethical objection that should bar its adoption.   The 

market I propose is one in which healthy individuals might 

contract for the sale of their organs and tissue for delivery after 

their death.  If the vendors’ organs are received and transplanted, 

a payment in the range of $5000 for each major organ would be 

made to a person or institution chosen by the donor.   What of 

the objection to the poor being coerced by poverty to endanger 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 28. 

 

 

 

their health by selling their organs?  I repeat.  In an options 

market, organs would only be acquired from the dead.  No one 

need be induced or even permitted to sacrifice his health or 

bodily integrity for money.   The donation of the organs of the 

deceased by both rich and poor is currently strongly encouraged, 

precisely because most of us believe that surrendering the organ 

represents no sacrifice to the donor.  But doesn’t employing a 

market mean that organs will be allocated on the basis of 

willingness to pay, and so the rich will be able to buy organs that 

the poor are precluded from obtaining.   Some things it is 

believed are literally too vital to permit their allocation by ability 

to pay.  Had I the time, I would challenge this objection, and 

argue that there are fewer ethical problems in allowing people to 

sacrifice their own treasure to save the lives of those they love, 

than exist under all—what I, but not my colleague Dr. Friedman,  

view as the self-righteous yet cramped and craven and misguided 

UNOS system of allocation.   But alas, time does not allow for 

that.  For now I must underscore that my proposed options 

market does not speak to the question of to whom the organs will 

be allocated, only how they will be acquired from the original 

owner and possessor.   My proposal is consistent with and can 

accommodate any conceivable system of acquisition and 

allocation, including, purchase by a government agency, 

allocation solely on the basis of medical criteria, and provision to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 29. 

 

 

 

recipients at no charge.   Note also, that the options market does 

not require next of kin to traffic in the flesh of their loved ones.  

Instead it is one in which people contract to sell their own organs 

when they are healthy for delivery after their death, thereby 

taking the next of kin out of the decision-making process.   The 

central premise not merely of my proposal, but of all the others 

as well, is an obvious, even banal economic proposition.  If you 

compensate people for something, they will provide more of it 

than if you don’t.  Every economist who has written on the 

question including Nobel Prize-winner Gary Becker, has argued 

in favor of using personal incentives to increase the supply of 

transplant organs.   The price of the prohibition on the sale of 

human organs, is the death of many thousands of people each 

year.   

IRA FLATOW 

One minute.    

LLOYD COHEN 

Were the suffering and death of the victims of this pernicious 

policy more visible, the stale and empty pieties about the sacred 

human body being despoiled by the profane market would be 

revealed for the vacuous moral posturings that they are.  Such 

moralizing rather than reflecting an adherence to noble 

principles, instead bespeaks a fanatical adherence to abstract, 

inapposite principles, by those who are well isolated from the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 30. 

 

 

 

horrific human consequences of their folly.   It is not the payment 

for organs that offends human dignity, but rather the fanatical 

unwillingness to save thousands of lives by permitting such 

payments, that is a great offense to human dignity.   

IRA FLATOW  

Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  Our final speaker against the 

proposition is David Rothman.   

DAVID ROTHMAN 

The question that’s on the slide behind me, “We should legalize 

the market for human organs,”  is a very prominent one, 

becoming more prominent over the last year or two.  And you’ve 

heard from our opponents some of the reasons for the 

prominence.   I want to focus you clearly on what this one means.  

It’s not what you just heard from Lloyd Cohen, about a futures 

option.   That’s a wrinkle with building on cadavers.  What this is 

really about, is the sale of organs from living donors.  When you 

go to vote, you’ve got to think not about the cadaver, not about, 

you know, giving the family a little bit of a burial expense.  You 

have got to think about, do we want to be in a system where we 

pay people to give us their kidneys.  That’s the question.   Now 

I’m going to propose a variety of reasons to you, why I think that 

would be totally misguided, indeed maybe even self-defeating.  

Let me start with the first problem.  And that is that although it 

seems very commonsensical to think that if we make a market it 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 31. 

 

 

 

will increase the supply, there are very, very good reasons, many 

drawn from behavioral economics, some drawn from past 

experience, that suggest that in fact, to create a market might 

diminish the supply, not increase it.   In the first instance, if I 

can buy it why should I give it.  All right, a family member comes 

down with kidney disease—please do remember there is dialysis 

as well, this is not just simply life-death.  Family member comes 

down, yes, I could give it, but I’m, you know, I’ve been pretty 

well-off these days, I can buy it.   Yes, the risk is minimal, but 

why should I take any risk, if I can go out and put down X-teen 

thousands of dollars to purchase a kidney.  It wouldn’t make any 

sense, I wouldn’t have my children donate if I could purchase.  

Don’t think easily that, if you create the market, altruism will not 

dissipate.  There’s a wonderful example of this, the name should 

be familiar to some of you at least, Richard Titmus, English 

sociologist who studied blood donations in England and the US.   

What he discovered is that in England, where the sale of blood 

was not allowed, rates of donation were considerably higher than 

the US, where the sale of blood was allowed, eventually we move 

away from sale.  The Titmus data’s pretty convincing, watch out 

about markets.   Another example of this, I’ll do it rapidly but it’s 

a great study, took place in an Israeli nursery.  Four o’clock in 

the afternoon you were supposed to pick up your child.  Most 

made it, some didn’t make it.  And there was lateness, you 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 32. 

 

 

 

excused yourself, you felt bad, and you tried not to do it again.    

Then some wise social scientist tried an experiment.  They told 

the day care center, the day care center went along with this, let’s 

institute a fine.  So they instituted a fine, on the theory that if we 

fine people for coming late, the amount of lateness will go down.   

You know of course what happened.  No sooner did they institute 

the fine, than the rate of lateness went up.  Why, it’s simple.  It 

became not a moral obligation, not my duty to the caretakers, but 

a price.  And if I could afford the price, I would come late.   The 

data came in very nicely, these social scientists then added 

another wonderful little twist.  They took away the fine, and then 

they watched the rate of lateness.  What happened then?  The 

rate of lateness stayed high, much higher than before.   Their 

bottom line, and they weren’t thinking of this in our context but 

it’s gorgeous, once a commodity, always a commodity.  Don’t 

experiment easily, once a commodity, always a commodity.  I 

want you to take a different kind of intellectual exercise now, 

than the ones— they’re a little gory and a little Dukakis—

reminding of, you know, okay, your loved one needs an organ, 

what are you going to do.   I want you to take a different exercise, 

and think a little bit about, what it would be like to live in a 

society where we had a market in organs.  Roughly the price, 

much higher than the folks have been telling you, we could—we 

would probably, I mean The Economist put it at about 250,000.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 33. 

 

 

 

Sake of argument, you get about $125,000 if you give your organ.  

Now, first response of course would be, well, the poor—I’m gonna 

come to the middle class in a moment.  The poor, will be out 

there donating and haven’t we done well by them.  From 

everything we know in Third World countries, the sale—  Frank 

already mentioned Manila, it’s true in India.  Everything we know 

about it, you sell your organ, you’re out of debt for a very short 

period of time, you’re back in debt, right thereafter.  The reasons 

for your debt are not gonna be rescued by a sale.  Secondly, 

imagine, even after this administration is gone, you have in your 

possession right there on either side of you, a $150,000 

commodity.   Medicaid [UNCLEAR], before you go on Medicaid, 

you will sell that organ?  I mean, think of the welfare system, 

where everybody’s got, you know, that kind of money, sitting right 

there—   

IRA FLATOW 

One minute—   

DAVID ROTHMAN  

—and [UNCLEAR] take it away without any problem.  Folks say, 

you know, oh, we’ll keep the foreign from doing it.  Why, if it’s 

such a great benefit, why not a green card, why not an 

immigrant.  As you think about voting, just remember the great 

Emma Lazarus line on our Statue of Liberty, give me your tired, 

your poor, the wretched refuse of your teeming shores, dot-dot-



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 34. 

 

 

 

dot, so we can have your kidney.  Let me close in my 45 seconds, 

with what it would mean to your kids, and what it would mean to 

you if they could do it.   We’ve got some good, enterprising folks 

from Wall Street in the audience I’m sure.  125,000 tax-free 

invested when you’re 18, mighty tempting.  When do you tell your 

prospective bride that you can pay the down payment, what do 

you do when your father-in-law turns to you and says have you 

sold your kidney yet.  What do you—    

IRA FLATOW  

Time’s up—   

DAVID ROTHMAN  

—when your kid comes—I’ll close with this— and he says, I want 

to go the Ivy League, not to my state school, and you as the 

parent say, I can’t afford it, but you’ve got your kidney.   

IRA FLATOW  

Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  I’m going to just take the opportunity 

before we move on, it’s the prerogative as the host or chair, 

whatever we call my seat, to ask a couple of questions about 

what we just heard and I want to ask Lloyd, who is very, very— 

feels very strongly about it—is very animated about this topic.   

You just sat here and listened to this.    

LLOYD COHEN  

Gahhh!     



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 35. 

 

 

 

IRA FLATOW  

Was… [LAUGHTER]   You know, he made a very emotional case 

about, you know, everything that you don’t believe in on this 

topic.  What is your reaction to…you know, would you want to  

live in a society where a kidney sells, where all 18-to-20-year-olds 

can sell a kidney for $50,000 or $100,000 to pay for an 

education?  [PAUSE]  Are we going down the road to hell, do we—   

LLOYD COHEN  

No.  He—well.  First of all, David, he wants you to answer a 

different question when you vote later.  He wants it to be the 

question on live kidney sales.  Well, that isn’t the resolution.  The 

resolution is quite clear, should we legalize the market for human 

organs.  So he gives you the list of horribles of the worst 

conceivable market, and says, vote against that.   I tell you, 

there’s a slew of possible markets, many of them quite innocent 

including merely a cadaveric market.  Clearly distinguishable.  

And that falls within this notion of a market in organs.  Now, 

there’s no more reason to think that— or I can see no 

particular—I can’t imagine a society, in which people would feel 

pressured, you know, to sell an organ for cash.  It’s an evasion.  

And it’s just a list of horribles, that doesn’t exist—  

IRA FLATOW 

Okay—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 36. 

 

 

 

LLOYD COHEN  

—anywhere, and that will not exist here.   

IRA FLATOW 

David, you want to answer that?   

DAVID ROTHMAN  

I can do it quickly.  Trust me, we wouldn’t be here, if we were 

talking about annuities for cadaveric organs.  The reason we’re 

here—   

IRA FLATOW  

That’s “cadaver,” right, “cadaveric”—   

DAVID ROTHMAN  

Yes, sorry—  

IRA FLATOW 

Okay, just—   

DAVID ROTHMAN  

No—   

IRA FLATOW 

My radio thing—   

DAVID ROTHMAN  

Oh, okay—   

IRA FLATOW 

—coming through with it.   

DAVID ROTHMAN  

We wouldn’t be here if we were talking about futures markets, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 37. 

 

 

 

we’re here for one—   

LLOYD COHEN  

That’s not true.   

DAVID ROTHMAN  

What—    

LLOYD COHEN  

I’ve been arguing for this for 20 years—   

DAVID ROTHMAN  

You—  But you’re not what’s captured the public attention and 

you’re not what’s driving the interest.  What’s driving the 

interest—  [LAUGHTER]   

LLOYD COHEN  

Really—   

DAVID ROTHMAN  

—is—  You’re not.   

LLOYD COHEN  

I’m very [UNCLEAR]—  

DAVID ROTHMAN  

What’s driving the interest is, donation from living folks.  None of 

us—look, we could quibble over this or that with a futures 

market— already I thought we heard—   

LLOYD COHEN  

So you’re willing to switch sides and come to—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 38. 

 

 

 

DAVID ROTHMAN  

No, no, I’m not—   

LLOYD COHEN  

—this side and be with me on that one.    

DAVID ROTHMAN  

No—the reason why I wouldn’t switch sides—  

LLOYD COHEN  

Ah—   

DAVID ROTHMAN  

—with you, is because of my fear of the contagion effect.  If we—   

LLOYD COHEN  

Oh, the slippery slope nonsense—   

IRA FLATOW 

All right—gentlemen—  Gentlemen—  [LAUGHTER]  We will get a 

chance—   

LLOYD COHEN  

There is no slope here—    

IRA FLATOW  

Gentlemen—   

LLOYD COHEN  

There are sharp, clear ledges.   

IRA FLATOW 

I’m using the wrong phraseology.  Maybe we shouldn’t call you 

gentlemen.  Um—  [LAUGHTER]  We’ll get this eventually, we’ll 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 39. 

 

 

 

get to this, we, we have a time for open discussion, you can open 

that wound up again and it sounds like it’s got an interesting 

place to go.   But let me move on and announce the result of our 

pre-debate vote, you all voted on the machines, you’d like to 

know how you voted.  Let me begin by reading the results.  They 

up there on the screen?   We had “for,” 44 percent, “against,” 27 

percent, and “undecided,” 29 percent.  So it was a large…  Well, 

we—it’s a large portion, I’ll read it, “for” was 44 percent, “against” 

27 percent, and “undecided,” 29 percent.  So we had a more 

people who are undecided than who are against it, there’s a large 

percentage of people still trying to decide that vote.   We’ll take 

the vote again later.  So we’ll see how the debate may have 

changed your opinion, but let’s move on now because I think, 

things are just getting interesting.  I’m going to have our panelists 

pose a question to the other side, one from each side, pose a 

question themselves and ask them if they have a question they’d 

like to have somebody answer.  Let me begin with, on the “for” 

side, Sally Satel?   

SALLY SATEL  

Okay, so I can address my question—   

IRA FLATOW 

You can ask a—   

SALLY SATEL  

Okay.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 40. 

 

 

 

IRA FLATOW 

Preferably to one of them.   

SALLY SATEL  

Yes, Dr. Childress, I wanted to ask you…  In nineteen—I’m going 

to quote you something you wrote in 1992.  [LAUGHTER]  And 

then we work up.  You said, “It would be odd to structure a 

system designed to promote altruistic behavior, with the result of 

saving human life”—and you’re referring to the UNOS system—

“when a system that relied on financial incentives could save 

more lives.”   So I took this to mean that an altruistic system 

would be preferable to an incentive system, if it saved more lives, 

an incentive system would be preferable to an altruistic system if 

it could be shown to save more lives.   Well, okay, that was 1992.  

Fast-forward 14 years to 2006 when you were the head of the 

Institute of Medicine Report on organ donation.  And in answer to 

the question that the report posed, what should we do about even 

considering, even pursuing a pilot trial of incentives, you had 

said—or the report said, but I know you concurred—“it is not 

time yet.”   Now the report spent a lot of time—I’ll be quick—on 

cadaver donation.  I’ll just say very quickly…believe it or not, 

even though two million people die a year, perhaps 20,000 are 

eligible to become organ donors, it’s just not that easy to be 

eligible, as a cadaver, so even if we used every deceased person, 

there wouldn’t be enough.   So your focus on deceased donation 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 41. 

 

 

 

would not help.  I’m all for it, let a thousand organs bloom, I’ve 

never heard a policy frankly I didn’t like, that would increase.  

But that’s not gonna be enough.  So my question to you is—  

IRA FLATOW 

I was wondering when we’d get to that—    

SALLY SATEL  

—if not—we’ll get to—here it is.  If it wasn’t time then, in 2006, 

when is it going to be time.  How many more people are going to 

have to die until we can have your permission, to finally, at least 

have a trial of incentives.    

JAMES CHILDRESS  

First of all, I still affirm all those positions and they’re not 

incompatible with each other.  Basically, my view is that, we 

should give the kind of system we have preference—and by the 

way, it’s not simply an altruistic system.  People have a lot of 

different motives for donating organs.  We get confused when 

we identify altruism with donation.   People are often donating, 

say for example [UNCLEAR] because they want to gain some 

meaning out of a tragedy that’s occurred.  They may be 

donating as a living person, an organ again because of the 

relationships involved, but don’t have to do specifically with 

altruism.   I think we have not yet given a fair chance to the 

system we have, in that we have not yet put the resources and 

energy into it.  Okay?  That is one person’s judgment about it, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 42. 

 

 

 

I see Amy frowning a great deal but you’ll get to respond to it 

in a moment, I still have—   Since the question was five 

minutes long I get that much time in response.  [LAUGHTER]   

IRA FLATOW 

It was actually two-thirty—   

SALLY SATEL  

It’s only three minutes.   

JAMES CHILDRESS  

[LAUGHS]  Now…there are only 13,000 to 16,000 people who are 

declared dead by neurological standards, who could probably 

donate organs.  There are another, on a conservative estimate, 

20,000-plus who are declared dead by cardiopulmonary 

standards, and that is a direction that the IRM report 

recommended, that at least merits a trial but since I happen to 

agree with Lloyd on this, not much else, but at least on this, that 

we ought to be giving preference to the cadaveric system over the 

living in part because as Amy noted, we actually don’t know a lot 

about the long-term risks, which we do need to know.  So it’s a 

matter of structuring this in terms of preferential systems, and 

the IRM report did not rule it out completely, that held, that 

let’s—   

IRA FLATOW 

Okay—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 43. 

 

 

 

JAMES CHILDRESS  

—see if this will work.   

IRA FLATOW  

I’m going to give you an opportunity now, James, to ask a 

question if you’d like.  You don’t have to—   

JAMES CHILDRESS  

Oh, I will—  [LAUGHTER]   

IRA FLATOW 

I thought you might, to any of our panelists.    

JAMES CHILDRESS  

Lloyd, you know that I find much about your…   

FRANCIS DELMONICO  

Do we all get a question?   

IRA FLATOW 

Yes.   

FRANCIS DELMONICO  

Okay.    

IRA FLATOW  

You’ll get—  [LAUGHTER]  I know you’re chomping at the bit—   

LLOYD COHEN  

Frank, you get two questions.   

IRA FLATOW 

I have to get out the boxing gloves for you guys.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 44. 

 

 

 

FRANCIS DELMONICO  

That’s fine.   

IRA FLATOW 

Okay, go ahead.   

JAMES CHILDRESS  

Let me raise this of Lloyd, because, Lloyd, other than, perhaps 

sensing a kind of market fundamentalism here, I cannot for the 

life of me see how you think the system you propose would work.   

If donors, now…people who are potential donors are not willing to 

sign a donor card because they don’t trust the system, they worry 

that they’ll be declared dead prematurely, or have their deaths 

hastened, why would anyone be willing to sign a contract for a 

delivery of organs after his or her death, for money, when that 

would seem to me to be the least trustworthy system.    

IRA FLATOW  

All right—   

JAMES CHILDRESS  

So if you can answer that—     

IRA FLATOW  

—brief—brief—   

JAMES CHILDRESS  

—I’d be grateful—   

IRA FLATOW 

—brief question, brief answer—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 45. 

 

 

 

LLOYD COHEN  

Okay—   

IRA FLATOW 

—from Lloyd.    

LLOYD COHEN  

If  James… he asserts, people are not willing to sign now, 

because they’re, they don’t trust the system and they’re afraid of 

being declared prematurely dead.  Where does he get his 

information from?   From idiot surveys.   No good social scientist 

relies on such evidence.  You—no economist ever wants to make 

use of a survey.  People say anything in a survey.  Surveys are 

not a test of anything.  Use a little bit of introspection as to why it 

is you may or may not sign an organ donor card.   People in 

general don’t want to contemplate their own violent, immediate, 

surprising death and dismemberment.   

JAMES CHILDRESS  

Okay.   

LLOYD COHEN 

Great surprise!  Okay.  In my conclusion I’ll explain why it is that 

the market will work, but I—   

JAMES CHILDRESS  

All right, okay—  

LLOYD COHEN  

Ira’s not gonna give me any more time—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 46. 

 

 

 

JAMES CHILDRESS  

I got it—   

LLOYD COHEN  

Even though I deserve more than anyone else.  [LAUGHTER]   

IRA FLATOW 

Just ‘cause you look like Mel Brooks doesn’t mean you get the 

extra time, so—  [LAUGHTER]  So hang in there, Amy, it’s your 

turn to—   

AMY FRIEDMAN  

Okay, before I get to my question I do wanna respond to what 

James said about the system—  

IRA FLATOW 

No, no, we’re [UNCLEAR, LAUGHTER]—   

AMY FRIEDMAN  

No, no, no, he—he specifically, responded—  

IRA FLATOW 

This is gonna be your question then.   

AMY FRIEDMAN  

Mmm, well, I agree with him, that the system should be given 

every opportunity, we just can’t wait for all the people to die, right 

now, so we all want the system to  work, we all want all of these 

efforts, we just can’t wait.   Now the question.  [LAUGHTER]  And 

this is for James.  If you object to paying live donors because the 

poor would allegedly be coerced by poverty into making an 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 47. 

 

 

 

unwise choice, do you have any objections to the middle class 

selling a kidney.   It would not be difficult to restrict organ sales 

to those whose income is at least 70 percent of the American 

median.  Sure, that would make kidneys more expensive, we 

could live with that.  How about you?  Does taking the 

desperately poor out of the picture make you relent, or do you 

now move to the paternalistic position that no one should accept 

any amount of money.   

JAMES CHILDRESS  

The issue has to do in part with relative deprivation, 

disadvantage, I used several different terms in the discussion, 

disadvantage being one of them, that’s often relative rather than 

absolute in regard to say, poverty level. I think that the way 

you’re raising the question here, I focus on obviously the extreme 

version of it, those in desperate straits—   The problem we think 

we—I think we would have is one that my colleagues also raised 

and that is, once you set up a system, you’re not going to be able 

to restrict it to the kind of level you indicated,…  [UNCLEAR] set 

it in terms of income level.  Because you’re going to be then 

charged with discrimination against the poor and their 

opportunity to obtain it, that—the system would be unstable, the 

way you’ve sketched it.    

AMY FRIEDMAN  

So your objection is practical, not ethical or moral?   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 48. 

 

 

 

JAMES CHILDRESS  

No, I’ve given an ethical one but I’m just saying in response to 

your question, that that would be the problem with the system 

you’ve proposed.   

IRA FLATOW 

Okay.  Next question, Frank, you can—   

FRANCIS DELMONICO  

So this is for Amy.  And I do so asking her in the reality of, now 

the market exists.  The market that Dr. Friedman wants to have, 

now exists.  She’s a transplant surgeon, she’s got a 72-year-old 

patient in front of her, and by her market system, there’s a 56-

year-old middle class, who’s before her as well.  The 56-year-old 

has come forward, and is prepared to sell his or her kidney, his 

kidney, and now I’d like to know from Dr. Friedman the following.  

Would you advise your 72-year-old patient to accept a 56- or 60-

year-old, when the insurance company of this patient is saying, 

we can get you to India tomorrow,  and we can have a twen—   

We can get you to Manila tomorrow, and we can have a 20-year-

old kidney for you.  If the alternative is that the patient could go 

out of country for a 20-year-old, versus your market system that 

will only provide the 56- or 60-year-old, what would you advise.  

Your patient.   

IRA FLATOW 

Dr. Friedman?   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 49. 

 

 

 

AMY FRIEDMAN  

The construct of the system has to be along the lines of what we 

have with Medicare now and that is that, patients who currently 

go out of this country to have transplants at non-Medicare-

approved transplant centers don’t have their medications paid for 

subsequently.   

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

That’s not true.  

AMY FRIEDMAN  

That's prohibited.  

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

But it’s not true.   

AMY FRIEDMAN  

What is— 

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

…end of discussion, that's not true.  You can come back and 

have your medications still, if you're Medicare eligible, you’ll have 

your medications paid— 

AMY FRIEDMAN  

Frank, we’re now required to inform every patient— 

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

Well, let’s go back, let’s go back to— 

IRA FLATOW 

Wait, you asked her a question, let, let— 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 50. 

 

 

 

AMY FRIEDMAN  

Frank, we are now required to inform every patient that if they 

don’t have their transplant performed at a Medicare-approved 

center, Medicare won't pay for their medications.  That’s the type 

of system that we ought to proceed with, the same kind of— 

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

Is this patient going out of country, is the patient going out of 

country or not?  

AMY FRIEDMAN  

They shouldn't be permitted to, because they won't have access 

to medications and other care.   

IRA FLATOW  

Okay, Lloyd, you get a chance to ask a question.   

LLOYD COHEN 

Okay, my, mine is a question for Frank.  Now, unlike the other 

participants in this debate, I'm not a good and generous person.  

It’s true, ask my daughter, she’s there.  [POINTS INTO 

AUDIENCE]  I am so callous and uncaring that I wrote a codicil 

to my will disinheriting any member of my family who consents to 

the donation of any of my organs, unless they are paid at least 

eight hundred and sixty-four dollars and thirty-seven cents per 

organ.  I posted this on my web page, and other people have 

downloaded it and amended their wills accordingly.  Now, I ask 

you, Dr. Pangloss, I'm sorry, I mean Dr. Delmonico… 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 51. 

 

 

 

[LAUGHTER]  Is your objection to my estate profiting from the 

salvaging of my organs so strong that you think it just and right 

to threaten innocent sick people with prison for purchasing my 

organ?  Is there some great ethical principle that I do not 

understand under which the sick should be condemned to die 

rather than obtain organs from the self-interested and even 

selfish?   

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

Well, the problem isn't that they would have to buy your organs, 

it’s that they would go elsewhere.  They won't want your organs, 

Lloyd.  They're going to go to Manila for the twenty year old.  

Thank you.   

LLOYD COHEN 

I don’t think that was an answer, Frank.   

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

Well, yes it is an answer.  The answer is that they're going to be 

in a position when you have legalized markets to say, who wants 

your organs in your circumstance when I can go to Manila to buy 

one from a twenty year old?   

LLOYD COHEN 

Well— 

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

That’s the answer.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 52. 

 

 

 

IRA FLATOW 

Sally wants, I'm going to break the rules a little, Sally wants to 

jump in.  She’s the only one who’s ever bought an organ here— 

SALLY SATEL 

Or thought about it.  

IRA FLATOW  

Or thought about it, so— 

SALLY SATEL 

I did think about it.  

IRA FLATOW 

…let’s get some practical— 

SALLY SATEL 

Frank, I don’t understand.  We can do that now.  I can go to 

Manila now, so I don't see why having a mechanism where 

organs can be compensated for by a third party makes any 

difference at all.  

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

The point is, Sally, that I’d like you to see what it looks like to go 

to Manila— 

SALLY SATEL 

Well, the reason I would have to go to Manila— 

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

And now, and the point is— 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 53. 

 

 

 

SALLY SATEL 

…is because I couldn't buy it here— 

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

…if you say, in the United States, it’s legal to have a market in 

the US, then you're going to set up a global competition for 

buyers.  And the rich people will, why should we stay here?  Why 

should the insurance companies— 

SALLY SATEL 

Frank!  We can do that now.   

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

And the point is, you’ll— 

SALLY SATEL 

And people will stay here if they can get it now.   

IRA FLATOW  

Okay, we can ping pong on this back and forth.  David, you have 

one last shot at asking a question.   

DAVID ROTHMAN 

The question I have for Amy or Sally, they can choose— 

IRA FLATOW 

Come on, you’ve got to pick one.   

DAVID ROTHMAN 

Oh really?  

IRA FLATOW 

Yeah.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 54. 

 

 

 

DAVID ROTHMAN 

Well let me— 

IRA FLATOW 

She can refer it to the other one.  

DAVID ROTHMAN 

Let me pick Sally, because if I recall correctly, some of your 

affiliation is with a group that doesn't like all kinds of regulations 

that some of us do like.  Your think tank is not known for its pro-

regulatory system.  Given that stance in most areas, let me just 

rattle off a couple of quick points— 

IRA FLATOW 

This has got to be in form— 

DAVID ROTHMAN 

Oh, it’s going to be quick— 

IRA FLATOW 

It’s like Jeopardy, it’s in form of a question.  

DAVID ROTHMAN 

It is.   

IRA FLATOW  

Okay.   

DAVID ROTHMAN 

Given what we know about Enron, given what we know about 

mortgage, works, given what we know, at least according to some, 

about the way hedge funds work, given these examples, what 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 55. 

 

 

 

makes you confident that a regulatory system where everyone 

could enter the market could possibly work?  Everything we know 

about regulation suggests that this would be a disaster, and to 

move us to a regu-, to count on regulation as you do, as Amy did 

earlier, you're out of your league.   

IRA FLATOW 

All right— 

SALLY SATEL 

Well, first— 

IRA FLATOW 

Amy or Sally, whatever, which… 

SALLY SATEL 

Thank you for bringing up AEI, because it’s actually a place 

where we have more intellectual freedom than most universities, 

which is why I can talk about a regulated system and don’t have 

to adhere to a classic free market form.  Now, the kind of system I 

have in mind, really is a straw man I think you guys keep setting 

up, we are not talking about a classic commercial free for all, or a 

free market, or an eBay system.  We’re talking about a third party 

payer.  For example, today you, Ira, could decide to give a kidney.  

You’d be called a Good Samaritan donor, you would show up at 

New York Med, and you would say, please give my organ to the 

next person on the list in this region, in this hospital, in the 

country.  And they would do it.  The only difference in a model 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 56. 

 

 

 

that we’re thinking, or I'm thinking about, is where you go and 

give your organ, and your retirement account is wired forty 

thousand dollars, end of story.  Everything else is the same, the, 

the screening you go through, the same medical check up, 

everything.   

IRA FLATOW  

Okay, we now have time for question and answers from the 

audience, and please make your way out to the microphone, or 

have the microphone meet you, or a meeting of minds some place 

in the middle of the aisle.  Go ahead, you can stop there and ask, 

go ahead.   

JOHN FUNG 

My name is— 

IRA FLATOW  

Technology problem with the mic, is it working?   

JOHN FUNG 

Thanks, my name is— 

IRA FLATOW 

We don’t hear you.   

JOHN FUNG 

Can you hear me?   

IRA FLATOW 

All right, go ahead.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 57. 

 

 

 

JOHN FUNG 

Well, my name is John Fung, and I'm pleased to say I had no 

meeting with people on the panel.  By disclosure, I was a 

transplant surgeon at the University of Pittsburgh for twenty 

years, and now at the Cleveland Clinic.  During my years at the 

Cleveland Clinic, at the University of Pittsburgh I was fortunate 

to have been involved in the care of Robert Casey, who was then 

the Governor of Pennsylvania, having been part of the team that 

had performed a combined heart and liver transplant on him.  

And shortly after his transplant he met the family of the donor.  

His mother, the donor’s mother, relayed to Governor Casey at the 

time that the funeral expenses for her son couldn't, they couldn't 

come up with the money for it.  And as it turns out, to maybe, 

perhaps the audience doesn't realize, is that, funeral directors 

charge an additional amount on top of the costs of the 

preparation for the body on the order of about three hundred 

dollars because of the donation process.  And so Governor Casey 

at the time, along with some of the transplant procurement 

centers in the state, came up with Act 102, which provided the 

opportunity for citizens of Pennsylvania to donate a dollar as part 

of their annual tax— 

IRA FLATOW  

Mr. Fung, I'm going to have to ask you to get to your question— 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 58. 

 

 

 

JOHN FUNG 

I'm sorry— 

IRA FLATOW 

I have other people waiting.  

JOHN FUNG 

So the question, all right, and anyway, the three hundred dollars 

that was assigned to be allowed to pay for these funeral expenses 

was never implemented, even though it was approved by the 

state legislature, and the reason was because we didn't, it was 

thought to be against the federal regulations, the National Organ 

Transplant Act.  One of the issues here is, we’re talking about pro 

and con, the fact is that we don't have any data whatsoever that 

says it can be done, or can't be done in the United States.  We’re 

all referring to the Middle East, or South America, whatever.  So I 

think one of the comments for the pro side of this is, why not 

allow a pilot study?   

IRA FLATOW  

Okay, let me get— 

JOHN FUNG 

The American Medical Association— 

IRA FLATOW 

Okay!  You made your point, thank you.  Any comments?  Why 

not allow, why not allow a pilot study to see how…?   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 59. 

 

 

 

DAVID ROTHMAN 

Well there, again, I really want to draw the audience’s attention 

to the fact that the Pennsylvania initiative that Dr. Fung was just 

alluding to didn't trouble a lot of folks.  It was small, the amount 

of money was relatively trivial, although some wag in the New 

York Times wrote everybody who’s dying is going to go to 

Pennsylvania, which I thought was pretty absurd.   

IRA FLATOW  

Not heaven, huh?  Oh, I'm sorry. [LAUGHTER]  I see, okay, I get 

it.   

DAVID ROTHMAN 

Look, in New York, you know, first prize is one day, second prize 

is two days in Philadelphia, but that’s another story.   

IRA FLATOW  

We have to give them equal time now.   

DAVID ROTHMAN 

This is true.  But I can't emphasize enough that the excitement 

and the interest and the concern about this issue doesn't come 

from the, you know, the couple of hundred bucks in the cadaver 

world— 

IRA FLATOW 

David, I have to get to the question, and that was, why not give it 

a try?   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 60. 

 

 

 

DAVID ROTHMAN 

Well I really don’t have great problems with giving Pennsylvania a 

try, Frank and Jim may… [SCATTERED APPLAUSE]   But that’s 

not what we’re debating tonight.   

[OVERLAPPING VOICES]  

IRA FLATOW  

Okay, Frank, what--would you be willing to give something a try, 

or anything that they, some, some form of it?   

DAVID ROTHMAN 

There’s a guy in Taiwan, Formosa Plastics, a generous man, every 

time somebody dies whose family donates a kidney, he gives 

them several hundred dollars for burial expenses.  This crowd 

wouldn't be here if we were debating three hundred bucks for 

burial expenses.   

IRA FLATOW  

I know, but he’s not, that was a long story, well told, but got the 

point— 

DAVID ROTHMAN 

Three hundred bucks for burial expenses.   

IRA FLATOW  

Let me ask Jim, what— 

JAMES CHILDRESS 

First of all, I have no problem with that experiment, I wish it 

would have been implemented, it’s an expression of gratitude to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 61. 

 

 

 

the donors, that is very different from setting up an incentivized 

system— 

DAVID ROTHMAN 

That’s right.  

JAMES CHILDRESS 

…of the sort for living vendors, and they're not donors, they are 

vendors if we’re paying them to donate.  Why not do an 

experiment, because so much of what we have said today, on 

both sides, is actually a matter of speculation.  We don’t know 

whether it would be, some of these proposals would be effective 

or not.  We don’t know whether they’ll have bad consequences.  I 

think the main reason we should not change the federal and 

several state laws in order to allow some of the kinds of 

experiments that have been proposed would be precisely that we 

would then cross the barrier that I think David has emphasized, 

that once you’ve made the organs into a commodity, you won't be 

able to turn back, and that— 

IRA FLATOW 

Okay.   

JAMES CHILDRESS 

…the experiments, I think would be dangerous to do— 

IRA FLATOW  

Well, we got half…  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 62. 

 

 

 

LLOYD COHEN 

I have to make one, this is directly contrary to what the IOM 

report of two years ago, of which, weren't you— 

IRA FLATOW  

That’s the Institute of Medicine?   

LLOYD COHEN 

Institute of Medicine Report, which said no experiments, no 

trials, nothing in— 

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

The experiments— 

IRA FLATOW  

Well, you pay extra for the furniture, so just, just…  All right, let’s 

go get another question here from the audience.  

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

My question is directly a follow up on the preceding question, and 

it’s directed at Dr. Friedman.  Clearly if forty thousand people die 

every year waiting for these, waiting unsuccessfully for kidneys, 

and seventy-five thousand suffer on dialysis and lose their 

strength waiting for kidneys, then the current system is not 

working despite what James Childress says.  It’s not working well 

enough.  Now you pointed out before that there may be some long 

term consequences to donors, but the number that always 

appears in literature is that only point oh three percent of donors 

die as a result, in the long term or even in the short term, of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 63. 

 

 

 

donating a kidney.  So, it sounds like a very safe thing to do.  

Why aren't the major advocacy organizations doing more pilot 

research to assess whether there are any long terms risks, and 

also doing research on what types of compensation systems 

would mitigate some of the objections raised by the other side?  

I'm amazed that the advocacy organizations have adopted such a 

do nothing position.  And finally, let me just ask Dr. Delmonico, 

you’ve mentioned several times, and the other members of your 

panel, that the people on the other side are guilty of market 

fundamentalism, and I wondered whether perhaps on this side 

there was an overdose of equality fundamentalism, so that people 

in this country may be dying waiting because of concerns that in 

other parts of the world poor people are selling their organs.   

IRA FLATOW  

Okay, let’s, we’ll get, Amy, do you want to handle that?   

AMY FRIEDMAN 

Yeah, thank you for your comments on lag donor safety.  It’s 

critically important.  Nobody has done these long term studies 

because we don’t have a mechanism to capture and retain 

information about the donors twenty and thirty years out, and we 

don’t have the means of paying for it.  Right now we can have a 

donor who has no medical insurance whatsoever come and 

donate a kidney because the recipients insurance pays for it, but 

we have no mechanism after they get through the early post-



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 64. 

 

 

 

operative period to pay for their care.  That’s expensive.  And 

that's a part of what would need to be in a regulated system.  And 

thank you very much, all of the advocacy organizations, the 

American Society of Transplant Surgeons, the American Society 

of Transplantation, the government, and everybody at this table, 

on both sides, very much agrees that we need to capture the 

information about donors, we just can't afford to, and in the 

absence of universal health care or a single system, we can't do it 

because they just escape, we can't track them.   

IRA FLATOW  

Frank, did you want to respond?   

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

Yes, I do.  Four thousand people dying on the list, forty percent of 

the people who are dying are not in need of kidneys.  They would 

not, the market system would not affect them by having more 

organs available, because you can't buy a heart, you can't, unless 

you're in Egypt you can't buy a liver, you can't buy a lung.  One 

of the problems of the proposal is that, and David brought this 

up, the assumption that those patients would still have a cadre of 

deceased organs available.  But that experiment has been done 

in Hong Kong and in other places.  When you have markets, 

there is no, the deceased donation is negatively impacted.  So, 

right away, when you say four thousand people are dying on the 

list, not quite, but almost half are dying in need of organs that he 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 65. 

 

 

 

market system will not impact.  Now, next, on the kidney front, of 

those that are dying, we need to make an assessment of why 

they're dying, and whether or not that is simply because they 

have not received an organ.  Some of the patients that are dying 

on the list have been on that list for an extended period of time, 

inactive.  And this was a point that we didn't get an opportunity 

to discuss.  Inactive means that you do not receive an offer for a 

kidney.  The market system will not impact an individual that is 

inactive on the list.  Currently, thirty-three percent of the list, 

waiting for kidneys, twenty-four thousand patients are inactive 

on the list.  That needs to be evaluated further before we go down 

the road of a market, we better assess the wait list of the premise 

to have markets.  

IRA FLATOW  

Okay, we’ve run out of time for this section of the audience 

participation, now we’re going to move to the final last lap here, 

the closing remarks.  Each one of the debaters will get two 

minutes to sum up or rebut whatever they’d like to say, and I’ll 

give you a one minute warning, and we’ll start with Jim, you go 

first.  

JAMES CHILDRESS 

Thanks.  I have never said that our current system.  

IRA FLATOW 

You can go up there if you’d like to.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 66. 

 

 

 

JAMES CHILDRESS 

Oh, that's fine, I’ll sit here, I’ll be fine.  I’ve never said that our 

current system is working well enough.  I think we have a good 

system, not yet a great system, and I think we need to do a lot 

more to improve it, and I think we can do so.  And I would just 

note in response to Amy’s comment, that we simply can't afford 

to develop a mechanism to follow up on living donors.  If we can't 

afford to do that, then we cannot afford to do what we need to do 

to make a market in living vendors and sellers for kidneys work.  

We cannot, I would argue, destroy, we should not, I would argue, 

damage or destroy our system, which is not working as well as it 

should, and we need to improve, by adopting a flawed market in 

organs.  Our opponents have proposed a radical change in our 

organ transplant system, and yet they’ve failed, in my judgement, 

to satisfy the burden of proof required for a drastic alteration of a 

system that is working fairly well and that can be further 

improved.  By contrast, we’ve, I think, given good reasons for 

suspicion of such a market, and I hope that you will vote no for 

legalizing, that is, against legalizing a market in organs.   

IRA FLATOW  

All right, you have a minute left.  

JAMES CHILDRESS 

I'm done.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 67. 

 

 

 

IRA FLATOW 

Okay, thank you for— 

SALLY SATEL 

Can I take his minute?   

IRA FLATOW 

You're, well, I'm going to go to Sally next.   

SALLY SATEL 

Can he yield his time to— 

IRA FLATOW  

Sally, you have two minutes.   

SALLY SATEL 

Okay.   

IRA FLATOW 

Sally Satel.  

SALLY SATEL 

Thanks.  Well, during the time we’ve been here tonight, yes, 

someone has died, and this was a real person with a real family 

who would have lived if there were enough organs.  It may sound 

maudlin, but it’s very true.  And this is why we need to 

compensate donors.  Altruism, or whatever is in that area 

between being paid and giving an organ is not enough.  And 

insisting that it remain the basis for transplant policy is a 

reckless and derelict stance that will only guarantee a future of 

suffering, and not just for the patients, but for, who will languish 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 68. 

 

 

 

and die on dialysis, but for black market donors as well.  Our 

opponents hate the black market, well so do we.  But somehow 

we learned something they never did, that the only way to stop 

elicit transactions is to sanction legal ones.  Simply clamping 

down on elicit sales only drives it further underground, or causes 

it to blossom somewhere else, and the only way out of this tragic 

bind is to increase the supply.  And the only way to do that is 

through a fair, transparent, safe, and legal means of exchange.  

Until then, the fate of third world donors and the patients who 

need their organs to live will remain tragically entwined.  And 

until then, our opponents, who refuse to allow even 

experimentation with compensation, will be complicit, yes 

complicit, in fostering the organ trade.  We welcome the other 

side to work with us, but as you’ve seen, they’ve never met a 

proposal they didn't reject or attack, they have a dearth of 

creative ideas, but an abundance of passion for obstructing 

innovation.  In closing, unless we establish a legal market for 

kidneys in some form, we should brace ourselves for more 

needless suffering and death.  Our side refuses to stand for that.  

So should you.  It’s too high a price for a humane society to bear.  

Thank you.   

IRA FLATOW  

Now speaking against, Francis Delmonico.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 69. 

 

 

 

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

When Sally says someone has died in just, you know, in the past 

moments, what you have to understand is that someone has 

died, and a market system wouldn't have impacted that death.  If 

you're dying in need of a heart, you can't buy a heart.  So, 

someone has died, and we do need more deceased organs, there’s 

no question about that, but the premise of a market system, by 

death on the list, is not resolved by a market system.  Next, a 

dearth of creative ideas?  Sally and I have met on a number of 

occasions to talk about what we can do differently to provide care 

for live donors that does not exist in this country, but is not a 

cash payment.  [01:31:16:10]  Sally and Amy are contradictory.  

When Amy says you can't go out of the country, and Sally says, 

well, you can go right now out of the country.   

SALLY SATEL 

I could have gone.   

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

Exactly.  She could have gone, and they do go.  And it’s not just 

that they're going from the United States, but they're going from 

Canada, and Saudi Arabia, and Israel, and the Gulf Countries, 

and from Europe.  And where are they going?  And why wouldn't 

they go?  And the question that was posed to Amy, the seventy-

two year old patient that she has, and Ira, excuse me, Ira comes 

along and he, in the system that they—Ira’s going to be the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 70. 

 

 

 

donor.  Wonderful.  But why should that seventy-two year old or 

a fifty year old accept Ira when they can go to Manila, if it’s 

legalized?  Right?  Sorry, Ira.   

IRA FLATOW 

It’s okay.  

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

Why should they accept— 

IRA FLATOW 

It’s an old kidney, so— 

FRANCIS DELMONICO 

Why should they accept Ira when they can go for a twenty year 

old and purchase that, because the United States says it’s okay 

to buy your kidneys.  Let’s have an outlet store in the poor 

countries of the world to go and buy kidneys.  That’s the problem 

that’s created by the United States saying it’s okay to have a 

market.   

IRA FLATOW  

Thank you.  Moving on to the for side, Amy Friedman.   

AMY FRIEDMAN 

Our opponents have told you that payment has been tried and is 

unsafe.  Been there, done that.  We tell you we know the way it’s 

being done now is wrong, let’s regulate it and do it right.  We 

have no intention of stopping efforts to increase the number of 

deceased donor organs.  This does not, in any way, affect those 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 71. 

 

 

 

efforts.  We can't afford independently, as transplant centers, or 

independent societies of transplant surgeons for example, to 

follow these live donors.  We don’t have those funds.  The 

government could provide the funds to long term provide the 

safety net and understand what’s happening with live donors.  

What we propose is the only solution to closing the dangerous 

black market.  They’ve implied the dignity of the donor would be 

assaulted.  We’ve told you there’s no dignity for people dying.  We 

propose an approach that preserves the rights of donors, and 

compensates them for the risks they do assume. 

IRA FLATOW 

One minute.   

AMY FRIEDMAN 

We’ll allow them to join us, the club of people who benefit from 

their life-saving gift.  Isn't that treating them in a most dignified 

manner?  This is supposedly an academic debate, and David 

even called it an exercise, but the ninety-nine thousand people 

currently waiting for organs, who are there for so long that they 

become inactive because they're too sick to get the transplant 

then, need real solutions, and they need you and us to be willing 

to think out of the box.  There are lots of clever people available 

in this country to devise a system that can do it right, let’s do so.   

IRA FLATOW 

Thank you, on the against side, David Rothman.  Your two 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 72. 

 

 

 

minutes.  

DAVID ROTHMAN 

Well, some quick principles.  First, beware of doctors who play 

regulators and economists.  What you’ve heard from the 

physicians is fantasy.  I'm not sure lawyers are much better at it, 

having heard Lloyd, but you're in a Never-Never Land, truly in a 

Never-Never Land.  We’re going to not have immigrants do it.  

Why not have immigrants do it?  Helter-skelter.  Sally came out 

with a formulation which those of us in New York are a little 

scared about.  The only way to stamp out illicit behavior is to 

legalize it.  I can think of commercial sex work, but I don’t want 

to go there.  Second, don’t think that you're doing the poor a 

favor.  You want to do the poor a favor, start thinking in terms of 

economic development, watch what China did, watch what India 

is in the process of doing.  Massive infusions of capital, growth, 

real change.  This kind of pittance of giving the poor a little 

money— 

IRA FLATOW 

One minute.  

DAVID ROTHMAN 

…here so that they can, you know, sell their body part, that’s 

absurd.  You want to do something for the poor, do it in a real 

way, spur economic development.  Finally, you're not doing the 

middle class any favor here either.  I made that point with 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 73. 

 

 

 

college, there’s got to be a better way to pay for an expensive 

wedding.  Don’t go down that route.   

IRA FLATOW 

Speaking for, final words, Lloyd Cohen.   

LLOYD COHEN 

So much pernicious, pretentious foolishness to refute, so little 

time.  [LAUGHTER]  Are you shocked and surprised that anyone 

would argue that paying for organs will not increase the supply?  

I was at first, and then it became clear.  The prospect of an 

effective organ market places our opponents behind the eight 

ball.  A market that would recover vital organs now being fed to 

worms would be the salvation of thousands of patients.  As 

against the saving of innocent lives, poetic statements about the 

dignity of human life being degraded by commercialism would be 

revealed as empty moral pieties.  Our opponents would therefore 

prefer to believe that a market would not work, and demand that 

we must prove that it will.  The obvious way to demonstrate the 

efficacy of a market is to permit one, but of course the law forbids 

that.  So what other evidence or theory can I offer?  First, 

consider the thriving organ markets in living donors in places like 

India.  A market in the US where the interest of donors would be 

safeguarded by American law would, of course, be much more 

successful.  And there’s no reason to think that somehow the 

American market would be like the Indian market, in the same 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 74. 

 

 

 

way there’s no reason to think, if any of you have been to India, 

that potable water from the tap was as common in India as it is 

in the United States.   

IRA FLATOW  

One minute.  

LLOYD COHEN 

And…  No!  And what does the success of living donor markets 

say about a market in cadaver organs?  The sacrifice is 

incomparably greater for the living donor than for the deceased, 

so the supply of deceased donors will be far more responsive to a 

positive price.  Second, look to the very reason that our 

opponents have such faith in the efficacy of altruism, and at the 

same time restrict its required application to organs rather than 

extend it to surgical services, nursing, and hospital care.  They 

believe that altruism should work for transplant organs, because 

they are of no value to the dead, and of enormous value to the ill.  

Whatever this vast disparity should say about the power of 

altruism, it speaks volumes in the world of markets.  Everywhere 

we look markets move goods from low valued uses to high valued 

ones.  Third— 

IRA FLATOW 

Lloyd, I got— 

LLOYD COHEN 

Ah!  I’ve got seventeen more reasons, but you’ll have to talk to me 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 75. 

 

 

 

privately.   

IRA FLATOW  

There you go.  Thank you all.   

[APPLAUSE]  

IRA FLATOW  

Time to pull out your little magic clicker and decide, we talk, you 

decide, so to speak, who’s going to carry the day  Pick up your 

key pad, I’ll tell you how to, once again you can see the motion is, 

“We should legalize the market for human organs.”  If you are for 

the motion, press one.  If you are against the motion, press two.  

And if you're still undecided, press three.  So, cast your votes, 

and we’ll give you a little bit of time to do that.  And while you're 

doing that I would like to take this opportunity to thank all of our 

debaters up front here.  [APPLAUSE]  Lloyd Cohen, professor of 

law at George Mason University.  Amy Friedman, director of 

transplantation, professor of surgery at SUNY Upstate Medical 

University.  Sally Satel is a psychiatrist and resident scholar at 

the American Enterprise Institution for Public Policy Research.  

On my left is James Childress, professor of ethics at the 

University of Virginia, and director of the Institute for Practical 

Ethics in Public Life.  Francis Delmonico, professor of surgery at 

Harvard Medical School, and director of medical affairs for the 

Transplantation Society.  And finally, David Rothman, professor 

of social medicine, and director of the Center on Medicine as a 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 76. 

 

 

 

Profession at Columbia.  This is the last debate of the second 

Intelligence Squared US series.  This program has been a huge 

success because of the support of people like you out there in the 

audience, audience members like yourselves who have been very 

enthusiastic about hearing both sides of big issues, and great 

issues they are, arguments that are brought here in all the series 

debates that have been hosted.  Intelligence Squared would also 

like to thank the Asia Society and Museum for being our venue, 

right here in this beautiful auditorium, thank you from the very 

beginning.  And as many of you already knew, due to the 

overwhelming success, and the demand for tickets, they're going 

to be moving out of this auditorium and into a bigger place.  

Intelligence Squared is going to resume in the fall at the larger 

Caspary Auditorium at Rockefeller University.  You know that big 

building that looks like the geodesic dome there at the Caspary 

Auditorium?  That’s at 66th and York.  And that first debate is 

going to be on Tuesday, September 16th.  Oh, this is a good one, 

small little topic, the motion: “Government mandated universal 

health care means inferior health care.”  That’s the motion that 

you can come and vote on, and a ticket package and individual 

tickets for the fall in 2008 and spring 2009 series will go on sale 

later this month.  An email alert and a brochure is going to be 

coming out in the coming weeks, so you're not going to be able to 

avoid that.  You can check the website also for updates.  You can 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 77. 

 

 

 

also get an edited version of tonight’s Intelligence Squared 

debate, it can be heard locally on WNYC, AM820, coming up on 

Sunday, that's May 25th, at 8pm.  These debates are also heard 

on more than a hundred and fifty NPR member stations, and of 

course, as they say, please check your local member station 

listings for the dates and times outside of New York City. Also, 

you can, of course, purchase a DVD from previous debates 

upstairs from the Intelligence Squared US website.  And now here 

is the result of the final polling.  Before the debate we had forty-

four percent for the resolution, after the debate we have sixty 

percent.  [APPLAUSE] 

SALLY SATEL 

Thank you, thank you.  

LLOYD COHEN 

Thank you.   

IRA FLATOW  

Against, against the debate, before we had twenty-seven percent, 

and it moved up just four points to thirty-one percent against.  

But it was the, of course, the undecideds who decided this, from 

twenty-nine percent to nine percent, a twenty point move.  So we 

had sixty percent for, thirty-one percent against, nine percent 

undecided.  Thank you all for coming tonight, we’ll see you on 

Friday, on Science Friday.  [APPLAUSE]  Congratulations— 

[TAPE CUTS OFF] 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “We Should Legalize the Market for Human Organs” (5/13/08) Page 78. 

 

 

 

END  


