
Intelligence Squared U.S. - 1 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

Intelligence Squared U.S.    Contact Publicist: Eileen Murphy 
590 Madison Avenue, 30

th
 Fl.     T: 917-913-2233 

New York, NY 10022                                                        Eileen@eileenmmurphy.com 

 
April 13, 2010 
 

Organic food is marketing hype 
 
For the motion: Dennis Avery, Blake Hurst, John Krebs 
Against the motion: Charles Benbrook, Urvashi Rangan, Jeffrey Steingarten 
Moderator: John Donvan 

 

RESULTS 

Before the debate: 

21% FOR 

45% AGAINST 

34% UNDECIDED 

 

 

After the debate: 

21% FOR 

69% AGAINST 

10% UNDECIDED 

 

 
John Donvan: 
Welcome everyone to another debate from Intelligence Squared US, I’m John Donvan of 
ABC News, and once again I have the pleasure and the honor of serving as moderator for 
the six debaters you see sharing the stage with me at the Skirball Center for the 
Performing Arts at New York University.  Six debaters, three against three, will be 
debating this motion, “Organic food is marketing hype.”  Now, this is a debate.  This is 
not a panel discussion or a seminar.  It’s a contest.  One team will win and the other will 
lose, and you in our live audience, several hundred of you, will be acting as our judges.  
By the time the debate has ended, you will have voted twice, once before and once again 
after you have heard their arguments to tell us where you stand on this issue.  The team 
that has changed the most minds over the course of the debate will be declared our 
winner.  So let’s now go to our preliminary vote.  If you go to the keypads on the right 
arm of your chair, there a bunch of numbers but you only need to pay attention to 1, 2 
and 3.  Our motion again is, “Organic food is marketing hype.”  If you agree with the 
motion, please press number 1, if you disagree, press number 2, and if you are undecided 
at this point, please press number 3.  And if you feel that you have made an error, just 
correct it and the system will lock in the last vote that you recorded.  So what we’re going 
to do is tabulate those votes and after opening remarks I will share with you where the 
preliminary votes stands at that point.     
 
And so on to the debate.  Round one: opening statements by each of the debaters in turn, 
seven minutes each.  And we begin -- first I’d like to introduce Lord John Krebs, known 
just to us as John Krebs on this side of the pond, here in the colonies.  John Krebs -- you 
can make your way to your lectern.  John Krebs was chairman of Britain’s Food 
Standards Agency, which is like our Food and Drug Administration, the FDA, except it 
was just the F, not the D.  And John, you were not chairman in 2009.  You had left the 
board, but it made a very -- it sent a thunderbolt to the system when it came up with a 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 2 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

study of a comparison -- nutritional comparison between conventional and organic food 
and concluded what? 
 
John Krebs: 
That there was no difference in the health benefits. 
 
John Donvan: 
Which rolled like thunder through the movement.  Ladies and gentlemen, John Krebs. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Krebs: 
Thank you very much, John, for those words of introduction.  And I should emphasize to 
all of you, do feel free to applaud at any time during my seven minutes. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Krebs: 
I start off with a disadvantage because, as Bernard Shaw said -- George Bernard Shaw -- 
we are two nations divided by a common language. So I hope that you will understand 
what I am saying even though I am speaking the English that occurs on the other side of 
the pond. Let me explain first of all where I’m coming from in this. As the former head of 
the Food Standards Agency, I am not anti organic, absolutely not anti organic. But what I 
am is pro accurate consumer information, I am pro healthy eating, and I am pro scientific 
dispassionate analysis of the facts. I’ve got no vested interest. It makes no difference to 
me whether or not you eat organic food, but I do sometimes get angry about the 
marketing hype. 
 
And let me give you a for instance. Just last week I was watching a television show about 
diet and health, and on the show there was a woman who was working for a low income, 
and she had three children, and she said to the interviewer, “I feel really guilty because I 
cannot afford the organic food to feed my children a healthy diet.”  And that made me 
really cross, because she didn’t need to buy organic food to feed her children a healthy 
diet, although -- according to the surveys -- six in ten Americans who buy organic food 
believe they’re getting a healthier option.  And they are paying for it, because when you 
go shopping, if you buy organic food, you spend $1.60 for every dollar you would have 
to spend buying exactly the equivalent food produced conventionally.  So, is it worth 
paying the extra for health benefits?  The answer is a plain, straightforward, simple “no”. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Krebs: 
Why do I say that?  I say that because I’ve scrutinized the evidence.  Now if you look at 
the evidence, you have to ask yourselves two questions: who is saying it, and why are 
they saying it?  And of course, if you listen to the organic sector that has a vested interest, 
they will pick and choose the evidence that supports their case, and no doubt we’ll hear 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 3 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

that later on this evening.  But I prefer to believe those groups of people who are 
independent, impartial, objective groups of scientists put together by official agencies to 
study the evidence with no side one way or the other.  And it’s not just the U.K. 
Standards Agency that John referred, but at the last count, in eight different countries 
where the federal or national agencies have looked at this issue, in every case they have 
come to the same conclusion: there is no health benefit of eating organic food when 
compared with conventional food.  Furthermore, and this is a really important point, in 
the U.K. we have an advertizing standards watchdog, and a few years ago they penalized 
our two major supermarket chains for advertizing and claiming that organic food is 
healthier, and they were stopped. 
 
Those supermarket chains were stopped from making that claim.  And note this: they did 
not come back with a legal challenge.  Why did they not come back with a legal 
challenge?  Because there was no case to defend.  There was no evident to support their 
case that would stand up in a court of law.  So what are the supposed benefits, health 
benefits of organic food?  Some people think that it’s more nutritious, that it may contain 
more of those essential micronutrients, vitamins, or antioxidants that are supposed to 
protect us against cancer.  But when you look at all the evidence together, sometimes 
organic food does contain more, sometimes it contains less, but taking the picture in the 
round, there is no -- absolutely no -- consistent difference.  What about safety of food?  
Because some people say, “Well maybe I ought not to take the risk.  Organic food is 
more natural.  It’s safer.”  And indeed in Britain 70 percent of the baby food sold is 
organic because parents are worried about what they’re feeding their children.  Well what 
are these safety issues?  One thing that people are concerned about is pesticide residues.  
Maybe the vegetables or the fruit that’s been sprayed in a conventional farm leave tiny 
residues on the surface that you may eat when you consume those vegetables.  Well two 
things to note.  First of all, organic farmers also use pesticides.  They just use a different 
set of pesticides.  But secondly, and more important, those residues are they -- when they 
are present -- in such minute quantities that they are harmless relative to the natural 
dangerous chemicals that occur in all the food you eat.  How many of you have ever 
drunk a cup of coffee?  Raise your hands. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Krebs: 
Okay.  Quite a few of you have drunk a cup of coffee.  Well let me tell you, in that one 
cup of coffee there are more carcinogens that you would get in all the pesticide residues 
in eating conventionally produced or organically produced fruit and vegetables for a 
whole year. 
 
So if you’re worried about potential carcinogens in your food, don’t drink that cup of 
coffee.  But of course, you don’t need to worry, because these chemicals may have the 
potential to be dangerous, but they are in such a low level in the food that you don’t need 
to worry about it.  But in a way, this is missing the point, because you can argue hither 
and thither about how much of this chemical is in the food, how much of that pesticide 
residue is present, how much of this vitamin, and so on.  What really counts is looking at 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 4 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

the health outcomes.  So, are people who eat organic food healthier than people who 
don’t?  And that’s a pretty difficult question to answer, but there is one study that’s 
looked at it, and it’s an extremely large study.  It’s called the Million Women Study.  It’s 
being carried out in the U.K., and it’s called the Million Women Study, because it 
involves at least one million women who over a long time period record everything about 
their lifestyle, including what they eat, and subject themselves to a variety of health 
measures, including suffering from diseases.  And that study shows that there is no 
difference in the health outcomes for women that eat organic food and women that don’t 
eat organic food. It doesn’t really matter to me whether you eat organic food or not.  It’s 
your lifestyle choice. It doesn’t bring you any benefit.  But what does matter to me is 
when poor people, like that woman I saw on television, feel guilty because they’re not 
feeding their kids organic food.  Just because of the marketing hype, they feel guilty, and 
that, to me, is an outrage.  So, I urge you to vote for the motion at the end of this evening. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, John Krebs. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Our motion is “Organic food is marketing hype.”  And now to open arguments against 
this motion, I’d like to introduce Urvashi Rangan, who is director of technical policy for 
the Consumer’s Union. 
 
That is the organization that puts out “Consumer Reports.”  And, Urvashi, your specialty 
there is labeling, and in particular when it comes to organic, you tell the rest of us 
whether if it’s organic on the label if it’s really organic in the jar. 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
That’s right.  It’s been part of my job for 10 years there, educating consumers about what 
organic means and what it doesn’t, and allow them to make informed choices about the 
foods they buy. 
 
John Donvan: 
Ladies and gentlemen, Urvashi Rangan. 
 
[applause] 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
Thank you. Good evening everyone.  I’d like to address a few things that John brought up 
in this resolution, and the first thing is the resolution is not about whether organic is 
healthier or not.  That’s not what we’re debating today.  We’re also not debating whether 
it’s more nutritious.  What we’re debating is whether it’s marketing hype or not, and that 
is what we’re trying to judge by the end of this debate. John brought up a few things that 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 5 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

I’m going to address, including pesticide residues and sort of dismissing any level of 
harm whatsoever.  And if you’re eating carcinogens in one thing, why not eat it in 
everything?   That is simply a dangerous -- dangerous theory.  And as a toxicologist for 
“Consumer Reports,” I have to say that we barely understand what one chemical does at 
one point in time.  We have no idea what the multiple exposures to low-level pesticides -- 
 
[applause] 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
-- chemicals, drugs, heavy metals does to anybody, and so, as a mother of two, and as 
many people are, if you have the health of somebody else’s hands in your hands and 
you’re responsible for them, you want to take extra measures to figure out what you’re 
putting in their bodies, too.  I’ll leave that now and I’m going to launch into our side of 
the case, which is that “Consumer Reports” has been deciphering labels since 1936. Our 
sole mission is to educate consumers about marketing hype, what it is, what it isn’t.  And 
for many years, I have to say in my last 10 years rating labels we’ve come across a lot of 
labels that are marketing hype. 
 
Natural: very few standards, no verification.  Hypoallergenic: also marketing hype, no 
standards. Fragrance-free, free range.  All of those labels are marketing hype.  They have 
no standards.  They have no verification. Those are our two most important criteria when 
we’re rating labels, and those don’t meet any of them.  On the other hand, organic food 
meets those criteria.  It does have a comprehensive set of standards behind them, and it is 
verified.  We don’t consider that to be marketing hype, and therefore we think you should 
vote against this resolution.  So, let me give you some more examples of marketing hype.  
Wonder Bread, wonder brains. They had that out for a while.  FTC took action against 
that, that they can’t call it that. Maybe some of you recall the Smart Choices label 
program, a big green check mark that was industry sponsored, ConAgra, Pepsi.  You 
found it all over, including Fruit Loops, full fat mayonnaise, a couple other things. That’s 
also marketing hype. Not such a smart choice.  And one other one: the United Egg 
Producers used to have a claim called Animal Care Certified. Sounds really lovely like 
the animals were cared for, but it could have been used on eggs that came from chickens 
stuffed in the battery cages where they couldn’t stand up, put into towers of battery cages 
where all their poop and excrement basically rained down through the cages onto the 
floor, contaminating the ground, moving into the ground water: could be labeled Animal 
Care Certified.  They stopped doing that, but, again, that’s another example of what’s 
marketing hype. Incidentally, organic production doesn’t allow chickens to be stuffed in 
those battery cages, and it’s just one of the reasons why organic offers a benefit over 
conventional.   Let me jump into five other big reasons why organic does carry more 
value, and first of all just to set the stage, Congress passed an act in 1990, the Organic 
Food Production Act.  The USDA runs the National Organic Program.  We have 
certifiers and inspectors accredited by the USDA. 
 
This is a public program.  Everybody can participate in it.  And, it is subject to 
accountability, it is subject to inspection itself.  This is a credible labeling program.  I 
don’t think we’re really wasting this much energy over something that is just simply 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 6 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

marketing hype.  But let’s get into five big reasons why organic offers benefit over 
conventional production.  First of all, organic animals eat a diet free of poop.  Can you 
believe that?  Why am I saying that?  Am I a nutball?  But no, conventional agriculture 
and conventional farming in this country actually picks up chicken litter from the bottom 
of the chicken coop, filled with poop, excrement, whatever that chicken ate -- including 
mammalian byproducts, cow brain, blood meal -- and guess what?  Animals eat that in 
conventional production.  It also can include garbage, plastic roughage pellets, and this is 
the stuff that we freely -- in face, we call it a rich protein supplement.  I mean, this is a 
protein considered useful for animal feeding.  It’s not allowed in organic production.  It’s 
just one reason why organic offers a benefit.  Second, organic is free of antibiotics; they 
cannot be used.  Antibiotic resistance is a huge growing public health problem in this 
country.  
 
[applause] 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
We feed antibiotics to animals every single day.  We wouldn’t do that with humans. We 
wouldn’t feed humans antibiotics every day.  Why do we do it in conventional 
agriculture?  Number two reason why organic offers a benefit.  Third, we feed animals -- 
chicken broilers in this country -- things like arsenic, if you can believe it.  These are 
toxic heavy metals that we actually feed the animals.  They act a lot like antibiotics.  
They help them grow better, they help prevent disease.  And yet, the arsenic goes from 
their poop into the ground, it seeps into the ground, and the problem with conventional ag 
is people don’t think it moves anywhere.  But it does.  It moves into the ground, into the 
groundwater.  We create big pits of manure that go up into the air and contaminate it. 
 
[applause] 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
These things are controlled for in organic production.   Two last things.  Organic doesn’t 
allow the use of most synthetic pesticides.  It’s true, as John points out, that some 
pesticides are allowed, but one report estimates that about 60 percent of the pesticides 
that are out there are classified as a known, probably, or possible carcinogen.  If you can 
have food that doesn’t have those things, why wouldn’t you want to eat healthier?  Why 
wouldn’t that offer a benefit?  But remember, this isn’t a debate about whether you would 
buy it, but rather whether it is truly a measurable difference and whether it offers a 
credible alternative to consumers who are buying it, and whether or not consumers who 
buy organic are currently being deceived in the marketplace.  We would say no, and 
therefore we urge you to vote against the resolution.  Finally, I’d like to talk about 
synthetic fertilizers.  We actually compost human waste in this country and we put it onto 
conventional crops.  That’s right.  What you put in your toilet can get composted and get 
put onto the food that we eat, and that’s how it gets fertilized.  That is a prohibited 
method in organic production.  You may not use human sludge as compost.  It comes 
with a number of problems, including heavy metals.  And finally, synthetic fertilizers 
rape the soil.  And organic promotes it, and Chuck will be talking a little bit more about 
that.  Thank you. 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 7 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Our motion is “Organic food is marketing hype,” and now to speak for the motion, the 
only actual farmer in the debate tonight.  I’d like to introduce Blake Hurst, who is a 
farmer in Missouri.  He raises corn and soybeans and flowers along with his family.  He’s 
done it all of his life.  He’s also a writer who is published in the “Wall Street Journal” and 
the “Weekly Standard” and other magazines.  I’m interested Blake, is it harder to farm or 
harder to write? 
 
Blake Hurst: 
I can’t make any money at either one. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
Ladies and gentlemen, Blake Hurst. 
 
[applause] 
 
Blake Hurst: 
I’m used to not making much money.  Only tonight did I learn that I was a rapist.  This 
will come as a surprise to my family and friends, who don’t think much of me, but think 
more than that.  If you’ve ever driven through the Midwest on a summer evening, your 
windshield becomes covered by bazillions of sticky glutinous gobs of insect guts.  Your 
windshield wiper can cause a wreck because it just smears the stuff around, making your 
windshield as opaque as the directions for assembling a Christmas present.  The bugs are 
corn borer moths. Corn borers cause corn to drop ears, corn stalks to fall over.  They also 
damage the husk of the corn, making it vulnerable to a soil-borne pathogen called 
aflatoxin, which causes liver cancer in humans.  The insecticide Bt produced by corn 
grown from genetically modified seed causes corn borers to swell like a balloon and to 
explode.  I find this very satisfying.  I imagine pops, like a string of firecrackers, like 
popcorn on a hot stove, as all across my fields corn borers explode.  Bt corn of course 
disqualifies my crop as organic, even though a nearly identical pesticide is available to 
organic farmers.  And aflatoxin I should point out is completely natural.  Of course, 
we’ve on our farm lost our chance to be organic some 50 years ago.  We have a picture -- 
we have a picture of my grandfather standing in front of a corn crib.  He’s wearing a 
faded blue work shirt, overalls turned white from repeated washings, a broad-rim straw 
hat, and he’s carrying two ears of corn, one the before year and one the after, then after 
had a nitrogen applied to it, artificial raping nitrogen.  The after year was much bigger.  
Grandpa is grinning widely because he’s celebrating a record yield. 
 
I should probably point out that our farm has manure as a fertilizer source and at the time 
planted lots of legumes in long rotations: all practices recommended by the advocates of 
organic farming, usually writing in a sort of a tone of breathless discovery.  Yes, 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 8 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

Virginia, people were thinking about soil fertility long before the “Oprah” show covered 
“Food, Inc.” When commercial fertilizer became available, yields went up, costs went 
down, including environmental costs, as we use less resources to produce the same 
amount of food.  When this happens in other industries, it’s generally seen as a good 
thing.  The father of the organic method was Sir Albert Howard, a British agriculture 
scientist.  He taught that disease, whether plant, animal, or human, is caused by unhealthy 
soil, and the secret to good health is farming organically.  According to Howard, “The 
war in the soil is the result of a conflict between the birthright of humanity, fresh food 
from fertile soil, and the profits of a section of big business.”  That sentence could have 
been written a week ago and would have been just as unrealistic now as it was in 1949 
when Howard wrote it.  You’ll notice then, as now, the farmer is strangely absent from 
this narrative.  Tools of big corporations bought off by seed corn caps and glossy 
advertisements, we’re only practicing industrial agriculture because we’re tools of the 
man. The truth is better captured by that picture of my grandfather smiling from year to 
year as he celebrates a record yield.  You may find this bloodthirsty battle using chemical 
warfare, genetic manipulation distasteful.  It’s clear that our opponents here tonight do so. 
They imagine farming as a holistic walk with nature as we reap her bounty with hardly a 
mark left on the landscape and a utopia as we discover that connection to soil has been 
lost because of the application of science to food.  According to them we can walk back 
our dependence on petroleum, lose our addiction to chemicals and laboratories and be 
one again with nature.  Rarely has so much nonsense received so much attention from so 
many outstanding minds. 
 
[applause] 
 
Blake Hurst: 
Organic production requires its own set of environmental trade-offs.  Organic food takes 
more land than conventional farming for the same amount of food.  Organic farming 
leads directly to more, not less, soil erosion because conventional farmers disturb the soil 
less.  Organic rules are arbitrary with some practices clearly forbidden because of 
political pressure instead of science.  Some of the most environmentally costly practices 
conventional farmers use are approved for the organic farmer as well.  Some of the 
practices most important for food safety are not available to organic producers.  Hunger 
is the darkest factor of all and always closer than we expect, particularly in the parts of 
the world that are most likely to farm organically, although they don’t call it that.  Nature 
doesn’t care whether we’re hungry or well-fed.  We wrest what we can from her reluctant 
arms each year, and in order to have an adequate supply of food, we have to use all the 
tools available to us.  That’s the truth.  That’s the truth of this multi-front war we call 
farming, and as inconvenient as it may be to the critics of the present food system, that’s 
the way it will always be.  Eating organically is trendy, edgy, and advocated by all the 
right people. Organics consumers shop as a form of conspicuous self-congratulation, a 
chance to pat themselves on the back for their social conscience, and to enjoy the 
superiority over the coupon-clipping bourgeoisie shopping at Wal-Mart, though organic 
consumers should know this: her choices have costs, real costs: environmental costs and 
costs when it comes to world hunger.  According to the United Nations Food and 
Agriculture Organization, there are a billion hungry people in the world.  Every time 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 9 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

someone purchases organic food, more water and more land are used to produce that food 
than to produce the same amount of food on my farm. 
 
That’s the reason why you should vote in favor of the motion.  Organic food is 
fashionable, cool, an attitude, a chance to identify yourself with beautiful actresses 
instead of old farmers in overalls.  But mostly, organic food is marketing hype.  Thank 
you. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Blake Hurst.  So here is where we are.  We are halfway through our first 
round opening statement by each side at this U.S. Intelligence Squared debate.  I’m sorry, 
I’m going to rephrase that because this needs to be right for the radio broadcast.  I said 
U.S. Intelligence Squared, and I’m going to reverse that.  We are halfway through the 
opening round of this Intelligence Squared U.S. debate.  I’m John Donvan as moderator.  
We have six debates, two teams of three, who are fighting it out over this motion: 
“Organic food is marketing hype.”  You have heard three of the opening statements, and 
now on to the fourth.  I would like to introduce Jeffrey Steingarten, who is a bestselling 
author and food critic for “Vogue” magazine.  One of his more famous books is “The 
Man Who Ate Everything.”  I apologize, Jeffrey, I have not read the book.  Is it 
autobiographical? 
 
[laughter] 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
I’m referring to a very famous other person. 
 
John Donvan: 
Well let me recommend the book and introduce once again.  Ladies and gentlemen, 
Jeffrey Steingarten. 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
Thank you.  I started -- well I didn’t start out -- I started out as a lawyer and not as a food 
critic or a writer, and if this were a court I think I would ask the judge to exclude most of 
the previous testimony on the grounds that it was totally irrelevant to the proposition. 
 
[applause] 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
To say that organic food is a marketing hype I guess means that all organic food is a 
marketing hype, that everything about organic food is a marketing hype. 
 
That doesn’t do you any good -- it doesn’t do the other side any good to show that there 
is an advertisement that shows healthy people by eating organic food, if they actually are.  
I doubt they’re eating the food on the set -- photographic set.  So that’s marketing hype as 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 10 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

well.  I remember when I was on the FDA-approved advisory committee right at the 
beginning, and we were given advisory powers, and one of the things that we were given 
was BST, bovine somatotropin, to increase cows’ milk production.  And everything we 
were fed, except from one -- well you know, from the Center for Science in the Public 
Interest, was total hype.  Monsanto hired the farmers who sat in their offices, working 
with their computers.  Monsanto put overalls on them and everything, and they talked 
about how they knew that their cows were happy, producing all this extra milk.  We 
know that cows overproducing get mastitis and then there is pus, if I can use the word 
pus, in the milk.  No one wanted to use the word pus.  And maybe pus is not bad for you, 
but I thought it was -- 
 
[laughter] 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
The FDA was so afraid that we were going to vote against it, so they combined two 
committees, also the Animal Husbandry Committee, all of whom were supported by the 
agriculture department or by industry, for example, Monsanto. 
 
 
So that was lopsided and have always been lopsided, so much so that the other side was 
emboldened to move that it should be a crime for a milk producer to announce that there 
was no bovine somatotropin hormone in his milk because that would be marketing hype 
since there’s no difference.  The forces against good food are very powerful in this 
country and it’s enough to make you paranoid. 
 
[applause] 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
With all possible respect, our last speaker -- okay, I’m not going to say that you sounded 
like Dick Cheney, okay? But -- 
 
[laughter] 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
-- but he talked about farming as a multi-front war and that you have to wrest from nature 
that, you know, these kind of little rewards you, these little, you know, corn cobs.  I know 
four or five farmers, and I’ve spoken to them all in the last few days so that I would be 
able to learn all about farming. 
 
[laughter] 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
There’s one that I’ll nickname Farmer Al who grows some of the best peaches in the 
country.  They’re organic and they’re in northern California.  And it took a while for Al 
to start switching from non-organic to organic peaches.  They’re better now.  He was so 
mellow about it, about how you have to use this in order to avoid that pest.  And I asked 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 11 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

him whether he used Round-Up on his weeds.  He said, “Oh no, we just manage the 
weeds.” Just as long as they’re not -- 
 
19:22:48 
 
[applause] 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
-- just as long as they’re not higher than about that, they won’t threaten the plants, the 
weeds won’t and also scattering eggs of predators to the pests and so on and so forth.  
Al’s peaches are more expensive.  There’s no doubt that organic food is on average more 
expensive, so our next speaker, I believe having read some of what he’s written, are 
going to say, as the farmer did, that it’s almost a crime with all the people starving to 
devote any resources to some kind of elite food.  Now, I know that the best vegetables 
that I’ve ever tasted were organic, and they were grown on Dan Barber’s property -- he 
doesn’t own the property; Rockefeller owns the property -- but the property near his 
restaurant.  Conventional agriculture is not feeding the world. 
 
[applause] 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
To say that organic agriculture could never feed the world is sidestepping the fact that 
organic -- that conventional agriculture is not feeding the world and it’s dependent upon 
oil selling at $45 a barrel, it’s dependent upon steady climate, and it’s also dependent 
upon relatively available water. 
 
John Donvan: 
Jeffrey Steingarten, I’m sorry, you’re time is up. 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
Okay. 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Jeffrey Steingarten. Our motion is “Organic food is marketing hype.”  And 
now here to speak against the motion -- I’m sorry, I’ve skipped a page.  Now here to 
speak for the motion, I’d like to introduce Dennis Avery, who is director of the Hudson 
Institute’s Center for Global Food Issues, who was for some time an agricultural 
economist who worked for the State Department and writes extensively on food policy.  
Ladies and gentlemen, Dennis Avery. 
 
[applause] 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 12 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

 
Dennis Avery: 
To measure the depths of my sins, I’m holding up a book written by my son, Alex Avery. 
It’s entitled “The Truth about Organic Foods” and it traces the history of the movement 
from Germany in the 1920s on to our organic farming today, and the tragedy that organic 
farming doesn’t live up to the hype.  The people who are buying it and consuming it and 
offering it to their families truly want to do the best possible thing, as speakers tonight 
have said, and I certainly don’t disagree with that.  But this is not just an unfortunate 
failure to live up to the billing.  It is now a serious international concern, because we are 
about to enter the biggest farming challenge the world has ever seen.  We will have, by 
the year 2050, between 8 and 9 billion people.  I expect that instead of 1.5 billion affluent 
people, science, technology, and trade will give us 7 billion affluent people.  And if the 
Chinese reach half of the pet saturation that we have in this country, that will mean 
another 250 million companion cats and dogs; none of them vegetarian. 
 
We will need to double world food production again.  We will need to triple the yields on 
the best farmland, because that not only gives the highest yields and the least erosion, it 
displaces the fewest wildlife species.  The Great Plains had 60 million bison, 100 million 
antelope, 3 billion prairie dogs.  That’s three species.  The poor land has more, far more, 
species.  We are farming 37 percent of the land area now.  If we produce for 2050 by 
simply extending the borders of the fields we’ll be farming 80 percent of the land area.  
And if you think conventional farming isn’t feeding people now, just wait.  And the 
organic farmers can’t do this.  The key is nitrogen.  The Earth had 1.5 billion people 
before we got nitrogen fertilizer.  We would still be at 1.5 billion people were it not -- 
that might be better.  You might think you prefer that, but you aren’t going to get there 
with zero population growth movements, and you aren’t going to get there with meatless 
Mondays.  You’re going to have to triple the yields again on the best farmland.  Plowing 
itself is a danger.  Summer of ’07, 12-inch rainfall in southeastern Minnesota, second-
largest concentration of organic farmers in the country.  They not only had flooding; they 
had mudslides. 
 
Whole hillsides sloughed off.  Sandy loam hills should not have been in anything but no-
till farming.  No-till cuts erosion by 65 to 95 percent.  It doubles soil moisture.  It’s the 
most sustainable farming system ever developed.  And organic farmers can’t use it 
because you have to have herbicides to kill the cover crops so you can plant what you 
really want to grow.  They can’t kill their cover crops.  And the yields over all are about 
half as high.  We had a famous study that came out in the summer of 2007 from the 
University of Michigan, which has no school of agriculture.  The lead author was a fully-
qualified geologist.  And they said organic farming can feed the world and more. 
 
[applause] 
 
Dennis Avery: 
You’re entitled to believe that, but they made a fairly serious mistake in the paper.  They 
talked about one study in which green manure crops had put 1,500 milligrams per acre of 
nitrogen into the soil and that 66 percent of this nitrogen had been delivered to the 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 13 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

seedheads of the crops.  That doesn’t happen.  Everybody agrees that nitrogen fertilizer 
puts a higher percentage of its nitrogen into the crop seeds.  Thirty-three percent is the 
accepted figure.  On green manure crops it’s 20 percent.  The different between 66 
percent and 20 percent is starvation for half of the humans, or the destruction of wildlife 
habitat on a scale never yet seen in this world. 
 
This is not truth, and it is not a favor to you or to the population of the rest of the world to 
tell something about organic farming that is demonstrably false.  We will have to turn 
high-yield farming into higher-yield farming.  Thank you very much. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Dennis Avery.  Finally, with our motion “Organic food is marketing hype,” 
to summarize his position against the motion I’d like to introduce Charles Benbrook, 
chief scientist at the Organic Center, which makes you the only person who has the word 
organic on your business card.  The Center produces science with the goal of aiming to 
persuade all of us to go organic.  Ladies and gentlemen, Charles Benbrook. 
 
[applause] 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
Thank you, John, very much.  First of all, I think I need to start with an apology to my 
esteemed colleagues on the pro side of this debate, because I’m actually going to speak to 
the motion.  Tonight we’re debating whether organic food is marketing hype, and the way 
that I understood this -- and I think probably most of the people on our side -- is that 
we’re talking about the companies and the farmers that grow organic food and sell it to 
people.  They put claims on the label.   There is advertizing, there’s lots of information on 
websites.  I think we all have a pretty good idea on how companies market products and 
deliver information to consumers.  And in the United States, as you know, there is a 
number of laws and regulations that govern what is marketing hype and what’s not. 
Urvashi spoke to some of that. We’ve all heard the saying one aspirin a day helps prevent 
heart attacks. 
 
That’s kind of amazing that it does, but in large clinical trials, people that take an aspirin 
a day have a statistically significant lower risk of heart attack, and so the FTC and the 
FDA have allowed that claim on -- in advertising for aspirin. But if you heard an aspirin a 
day prevents heart attacks, that of course would be marketing hype. To claim that it will 
prevent goes over the line into marketing hype. So, how do we judge whether the claims 
that are made or the information that’s passed on by organic food companies crosses this 
line into misinformation or materially misleading information, which is a standard in the 
FTC guidelines? What the government says -- now, think about the last time you went to 
the supermarket. You can’t walk down any aisle without leading labels that say they have 
reduced this or low that or a good source of this or promotes heart health or promotes eye 
health or good for your cholesterol, heart healthy, etc. All of these claims that either 
promote a food product because there’s more of something that’s good or less of 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 14 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

something that’s not good for you, like saturated fat or cholesterol or salt, embedded in 
those claims are at least a 25 percent difference in the level of the nutrient. This is applied 
fairly universally across the entire food system. So, whenever you see these labels that 
says it’s, you know, a good source of lycopene -- you’re buying a tomato product; 
lycopene is a nutrient in tomatoes -- and it says a good source of lycopene, you can trust 
that the company has done testing that shows that there’s at least 25 percent more in their 
product compared to others. So, as we go through the evening, keep in mind that if there 
is solid scientific evidence that one food product, whether it’s conventional or organic, 
has higher or lower of a particular nutrient that’s good or bad for you buy a Good or bad 
for you, by a 25% margin that the government allows a labeling claim to be associated 
with that. 
 
Now, how is organic food marketed?  What are the principle claims?  And benefits?  
Well, number one, of course, is organic farmers may not apply toxic synthetic pesticides.  
It's just a blanket prohibition.  The products that they can apply encompass all of those 
that post any risk to humans or the environment.  It's true organic farmers request use 
natural products like copper fungicides, sulfur is used to help protect diseases.  Natural 
insecticide, Bacilus thuringiensis that Blake talked about, it's how Monsanto and other 
biotech companies have found a way to move the capacity to produce this natural 
insecticide into the corn plants.  And so without a doubt the reduction in exposure and 
risk from pesticides is the most common claim that you read.  And there is no question 
that organic farming reduces pesticide risk.  It's laughable for anybody to argue that it 
doesn't.  You know, American agriculture, apply rounds, a billion pounds of pesticides a 
year.  Some are not terribly hazardous, including Glyfosate which Blake will use on some 
of his genetically engineered crops.  But there are several other pesticides, especially 
insecticides to do pose significant risk.  And the fact that we're all exposed to pesticides, 
even before we're born, does play a role in our public health.  Do you all know that the 
average baby born in America has like 200 chemicals in its blood the moment it’s born 
from the exposures to its mother?  About one out of eight babies are born with a 
diagnosable birth defect? 
 
About a quarter of the couples in America are having trouble having babies.  They need 
some help in getting pregnant and carrying a pregnancy to term.  The scientific literature 
is loaded with thousands of papers that demonstrate a connection between exposure to 
pesticides and these adverse health outcomes.  To say that there are no risks for pesticides 
and no evidence, I mean if you don't -- if you don't believe in science, fine.  Go ahead and 
make that statement.  But you can't claim that you read the scientific literature.  That -- 
you know, it's just the way it is.  Another of the major claims that are made, and 
marketed, if you're shopping in the livestock part of the aisle, in the dairy or eggs or beef, 
livestock and organic farms have to be given ample space to carry out natural behaviors.  
They have to be raised in an environment where they can stay healthy without their daily 
dose of antibiotics, which Urvashi spoken out.  They have to be given access to outside, 
unless it's 20 below and the weather would be dangerous for them.  But they have to be 
raised in a much more humane way.  That's built right into the rules; all organic farmers 
have to do it.  If you care about how animals are cared for, if you care -- it's great that we 
can buy cheap bacon and eggs done cost much.  If you do care how animals are cared for, 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 15 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

organic agriculture with the only system of agriculture backed up by solid rules that 
require sound animal welfare: one of the reasons that we hope you'll vote against the 
motion. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
That concludes round one of this Intelligence Squared U.S. debate.  The motion being 
argued is “Organic food is marketing hype.”  We now have the results of where you, the 
several hundred of you in our live audience stood on the motion before the debate began. 
 
The motion is organic food is marketing hype.  We asked you to vote, tell us whether you 
stand for, against, or undecided on this motion.  Here are the results.  Before the debate, 
21% of you are for the motion, 45% against, and 34% undecided.  That's where things 
stand at the beginning of the debate.  We'll ask you to vote once again when the debate 
has concluded.  The team that has changed the most minds will be declared our winner.  
Now on to round two: it's our middle round.  And it's where the debaters address each 
other directly and also take questions from you in the audience and from me as well, as 
moderator.  I'd like to begin with a question to the side that's arguing for the motion that 
organic food is marketing hype.  In your critique of those who support and believe in 
organic food and organic farming, there is just -- there are these intimations of elitism 
that people who like organic food are people who use words like “intimations,” for 
example. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
That it's just a little bit snobby and a little bit snotty.  In fact, the research shows that the 
majority of people who buy organic food in this country are at the higher end of the 
educational scale.  I want to ask you, are you saying that all of these well educated people 
are actually rather stupid?  Are they missing the point?  John Krebs. 
 
John Krebs: 
You're absolutely right that people who purchase organic food tend to be from the 
wealthier sections of society simply because it's more expensive to buy.  And that's, you 
know -- you folks that buy it, you can afford it.  There are plenty of people out this in this 
country who couldn't afford to do it.  Does it mean that you're stupid?  Absolutely not.  
But it means that to some extent, you have bought in to what I claim is marketing hype.  
If I can just go back to Urvashi's opening comment, it is absolutely marketing hype that 
the claim that organic food is healthier for you, and that's why the advertising regulator in 
the U.K. stamped down on the two major retailers that made this claim, as well as on the 
organic producer body, the soil association who was making the same claim. 
 
It was hype.  There was no case to support it.  And it was banned.  If that isn't a straight 
forward piece of hype, exaggeration, implicit deception, I don't know what is. 
 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 16 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

John Donvan: 
Jeffrey Steingarten. 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
I wonder how long you conducted the million -- the lady study.  Was it six months or six 
weeks, was it two years? 
 
John Donvan: 
Jeffrey, what's your point?  Why are you raising that? 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
Many of the toxins in pesticides, herbicides could take years and years. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
What about that, John Krebs?  Do you think it's too soon to know? 
 
John Krebs: 
The million women study is still going on.  It's been going on now for about eight years.  
It will continue for another probably 15 or so years.  So we're looking at long term effect 
and no effects have shown up so far. 
 
John Donvan: 
Urvashi Rangan. 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
I think we're talking about elitism but it's really that organic food costs more.  Organic 
food costs more to produce, and there are a couple reasons for that.  One is that it's 
incredibly physically labor intensive.  You've got to -- as Jeffrey pointed out, you have to 
pull the weed.  You can't just spray a chemical on it.  It's harder to do.  So there is no 
question that organic food is harder to produce.  But the other major factor that has not 
been mentioned today is the amazing subsidies that all of our taxpayer money goes to to 
support cheap food production to subsidize late crops on corn and soy, and the myriad of 
ingredients that stem from that that end up in processed foods, hence creating cheat 
processed foods.  Organic doesn't get subsidies.  That's why between that and what it 
does, it costs more. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Blake Hurst. 
 
Blake Hurst: 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 17 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

Beg to differ -- of course, organic qualifies.  Same subsidies that I do, subsidies are tied 
to the ground.  They don't ask how you produce the crop.  My question -- I guess I would 
like to ask, you talked about fertilizer raping the soil. 
 
How does the soil know the difference between -- I mean nitrogen, you look at your 
periodic table.  There it is, it appears.  When I apply nitrogen on some of our acres for 
manure, when I apply some nitrogen from some of our acres, commercial fertilizer, how 
does the soil know the difference? 
 
John Donvan: 
Charles Benbrook. 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
I'll speak to nitrogen.  One of the major problems around the world, back in February 23, 
those of you that read the “Wall Street Journal,” there was a remarkable story about how 
the subsidies in India for nitrogen fertilizer started back in the Green Revolution days 
have actually led to such excessive nitrogen fertilizer use in India, that what happens 
when you put extra nitrogen on ground, you stimulate microbial activity in the soil.  And 
those microbes, they eat your organic matter, in effect, which degrades your soil quality.  
And the “Journal,” it was a very interesting and hard hitting story.  And it was just a week 
after in “Science Magazine,” there was a major research report that Dennis may have 
seen about China and how there is this major problem in China about the acidification of 
soils from too much nitrogen.  In America, in the Midwest, less than 35% of the nitrogen 
that gets applied winds up supporting the growth of that corn plant.  And the rest, some of 
it goes into the water and some of it volatizes into the environment.  Organic farmers, on 
the other hand, nitrogen is expensive to them because they don't have access to these 
cheap commercial sources of readily available nitrogen fertilizers.  They have to get their 
nitrogen the old fashioned way with cover crops and legumes and compost.  It's dear to 
them and it’s valuable.  And they use it much more carefully.  They don't need as much 
to support the same amount of growth.  They don't pollute the water.  They don't 
contribute as much to global warming.  And they improve the quality of the soil and it's 
these sorts of win, win, wins that are why even the USDA acknowledges that organic 
farming is better for the environment.  And that's one of the claims. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Dennis Avery of the Hudson Institute. 
 
Dennis Avery: 
There is a new set of products on the market from Arcadia Biosciences.  They're actually 
the product of a -- a research mistake at the University of Alberta.  They were trying for 
drought tolerant crops and instead, they got nitrogen-efficient crops.  Rapeseed, rice and 
wheat; you can now put on half as much organic nitrogen, get in effect what we thought 
of as a full crop, with very little left in the soil to leach into the nearby streams.  Can we 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 18 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

hope that the organic farmers will, at some point, recognize this benefit and help protect 
the water with nitrogen efficient biotech crops? 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
What does that have to do with how organic food is marketed in the United States? 
[applause] what's the point? 
 
John Donvan: 
I want to ask Blake Hurst, because you're our only farmer possibly in the room.  I think 
there may be some farmers in the audience, but certainly on the panel.  In terms of just 
the reality check that you can provide to us, a guy who gets his hands in the soils, what 
have you heard tonight that is the most out of touch with what really happens in the real 
world? 
 
Blake Hurst: 
I get this idea that -- Jeffrey says that conventional farming is not feeding the world, so 
his solution is to produce less food?  I mean this idea -- it is, indeed -- 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
Totally wrong.  If you're growing corn -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Let's let Blake answer that question. 
 
Blake Hurst: 
Yeah, well give me your example. 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
If you're growing corn on two pieces of land, farmers told me this, two pieces of land, 
one conventionally and one organically, the conventional plot will produce more corn. 
 
If you have less than a modern culture, the number of calories produced on the organic 
piece of land, which is what we care about, the number of calories on the organic land 
will be greater than on the conventional land. 
 
Blake Hurst: 
What's your source for that? 
 
Dennis Avery: 
That's impossible. 
 
Blake Hurst: 
I would like to know the source. 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
Charles can tell you.  I'm not a scientist. 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 19 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

 
John Donvan: 
Tell him Charles.  Charles Benbrook. 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
This is an important point.  On Blake's farm, we were speaking on the right over here.  
You'll be getting out in the field pretty soon to plant corn, right?  In the next couple 
weeks that corn will germinate in 10 days.  It will grow vigorously capturing solar 
radiation, pulling up nitrogen from the soil, and producing a crop for about 90 days.  
After 90 days it goes into synapsis.  It has to dry so he can get his combine in, and really, 
from the second week in August, maybe the third week in August, that field really isn't 
growing anything more.  Organic farming is based on a much more diverse set of crops.  
Organic farmers are going to get a cover crop on to the corn ground as soon its harvested 
so that that fall solar radiation is captured and supports biomass which support 
microorganisms in the soil.  So the way that organic farmers can and do produce more 
per acre is they produce multiple crops.  They integrate livestock and often fish with their 
crops.  And they're using that solar radiation in the early spring and the late fall when it's 
not as intense in the summer.  If you drive through the Midwest, our greatest agriculture 
regulation, it's only producing a crop for about 90 days of the year.  And there are at least 
six weeks in the spring and fall when it could be growing something.  And something is 
growing on all the organic farms.  That's how -- 
 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
John Krebs is also a scientist can respond to that. 
 
Dennis Avery: 
Another way to -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Dennis, I'm going to led John Krebs respond. 
 
John Krebs: 
I have a simple question to Jeffrey.  If indeed organic production is more efficient, 
produces more yield per hectare than conventional, why is organic food more than 
expensive?  Who is making all this extra money?  The reason it's more expensive is 
because you get less per hectare. 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
No, because it is -- first of all, there is industrial organic, the farming about which I don't 
know a lot. 
 
John Krebs: 
Sorry, could you say that again?  What? 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 20 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
Why is it more expensive? 
 
John Krebs: 
No.  What were the two source of organic?  You said there is industrial organic and there 
is something else organic.  A smaller scale? 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
There is industrial organic.  
 
John Krebs: 
When we're talking about marketing hype are we talking about the system organic are or 
we taking -- 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
Yeah, we're talking about healthy organic. 
 
John Krebs: 
Just a minute.  No evidence that it's healthier. 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
Yes, I know.  I was just trying to get you. 
 
[laughter] 
 
[applause] 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
Did it work?  The reason it's more expensive because it involves a lot of hand labor.  You 
have to hire in the -- in the northeast you have to hire either migrant laborers or you have 
to build them houses.  The best apple farmer in this whole area builds houses for her 
laborers, and then sends them to school, sends the kids to school.  I guess the farmers are 
not in that position.  But there is a lot of hand work.  You can't have a combine coming 
through and doing whatever a combine does.  Plus also, I understand that this whole 
tillage argument -- I have been told that organic farming does not require tilling.  Is that 
true or do you know -- 
 
Blake Hurst: 
No, that is not true.  It's bare earth farming.  Organic farming is bare earth farming. 
 
John Donvan: 
Dennis can you respond to Charles' point that he made about essentially that an organic 
farmer is working a more diverse range of -- working the soil in more diverse ways by 
introducing different crops and its interaction with livestock? 
 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 21 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

Dennis Avery: 
It's certainly working in more diverse ways.  And I want to compliment the organic 
movement for having been concerned from the beginning with the health of the soil. 
 
[applause] 
 
Dennis Avery: 
Unfortunately, unfortunately they aren't using it very well.  And the point he made about 
the corn getting its growth in the first 90 days means that the organic farmers are starving 
their corn for part of that 90 days.  They are not getting what that field could produce 
because the organic nitrogen is slow release. 
 
John Donvan: 
Urvashi, do you want to come in on this? 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
It is a strange argument.  And what I guess I want to -- I want to zoom out a little bit and 
talk about genetically modified crops.  The U.N. has issued two reports actually, one just 
recently and one a few years ago.  That for Africa and Eastern Europe, organic 
agriculture is the answer for those areas for maintaining the sustainable food production 
supply.  The second thing that also has -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Why?  What is this logic of that?  Why is organic the answer for those areas? 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
It resides within many of the reasons we're talking about, sustainable production, jobs, 
less pesticides, less inputs.  Those things cost money.  While our opponents are reporting 
the miracles of genetic modification, and pesticides, and how wonderful they are, what 
most consumers don't know is that those things were not required to be tested for how 
well they work or how safe they are before they got out on the market. 
 
[applause] 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
And those are the aspects that the U.N. is considering when they make those reports 
available and anyone is free to read those reports. 
 
John Donvan: 
Blake Hurst. 
 
Blake Hurst: 
Of course there is long and extensive testing for -- what the National Resource Council 
says--genetically modified seed is tested before it goes on the market.  How many of you 
have bought genetically modified seed?  How many of you have toured Montsanto's 
laboratories?  How many of you know the process that it goes through? 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 22 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

 
Charles Benbrook: 
I have. 
 
[applause] 
 
Blake Hurst: 
The point I'm making is that that's blatantly untrue.  As to the point of whether it works or 
not, I guess that is the [inaudible] that's the consumer -- because the NRC says that there 
is no conceptual distinction, that's the National Research Council, your government, no 
conceptual distinction exists between genetically modification of plants and 
microorganisms by classical methods or by molecular techniques that modify DNA and 
transfer genes.  There is no difference.  It's just a faster and more effective way of 
improving crops.  The biggest mistake the organics standard made was not accepting 
genetically modified seeds.  Absolutely. 
 
John Donvan: 
I'd like to go to the audience for some questions.  How this works is that if you raise your 
hand and I find you, I'll ask you to stand up.  If you're a member of the news media, we'd 
prefer that you tell us that fact, who you work for.  You'll be given a microphone.  And 
hold the microphone about that far from -- one fist away from your mouth so that the 
radio can pick you up.  I just have a question before we get there.  What strikes me about 
this debate is that the tone here is as bitterly partisan as anything that's happening in 
Washington.  And I'm curious about why that is.  And it's on both sides.  It's also from all 
of us here in the hall.  There is a nasty feeling to this issue.  And I'm curious about why -- 
we're talking about food. 
 
What we eat.  I want to hear from one panelist, nominate yourself on each side, about 
why are we there?  In this topic?  Charles, you're nodding.  You represent the organic 
center.  Why? 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
The organic food industry -- it actually deserves the word industry, now accounts for 
about 3% of our food supply.  It's not threatening the profits of Cargill and ADM and 
Craft and General Mills in the marketplace, yet, but it is in the world of ideas.  And with 
all due respect to John Krebs, the science is strongly lining up behind organic farming.  It 
is more nutrient-dense.  There are 70 or 80 studies that have reached that conclusion.  To 
just dismiss them that they're not there, you know, you can do it.  But if you read science, 
it's there.  So I think organic food and what this whole area represents, it worries the 
conventional agriculturist to that people are going to start to ask questions about how our 
food is grown and what's in it, and how it might be contributing to the fact that we 
Americans spend more than any nation in the world on healthcare, but our health across a 
number of measures really doesn't stack up that well.  And I think it's a lot about what we 
eat. 
 
[applause] 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 23 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

 
John Donvan: 
John Krebs, do you want to -- not just respond, but to take on my question. 
 
John Krebs: 
Well, as I said at the beginning, you would expect those with organic on their business 
card to play the claim that organic food is better for you.  Not surprising, Chuck, well 
done.  But why is this such a divisive issue?  It's a divisive issue because it's a side show 
from the real problems that we face which are first of all about feeding the growing world 
population as Dennis said.  And second of all, for those of us who are lucky to live in an 
affluent society, to eat a healthy balanced diet and secure our own health. 
 
Organic food is a complete side show to both of those issues.  Those of us who care 
deeply about those issues are very frustrated by the repeated claims of the organic sector 
explicit or implicit that they will solve these problems. 
 
John Donvan: 
So it sounds like each side thinks the other side is actually doing harm here? 
 
John Krebs: 
Exactly. 
 
John Donvan: 
Not just disagreeing but doing harm.  Gentlemen, right there you could rise and hold the 
mic close to you, and please make it a brief question.  Thank you. 
 
Male Speaker: 
One of the points that Mr. Avery made was that we need to significantly increase food 
production.  And I'd like to just suggest that in making fun of meatless Monday, you are 
asking a question about the concerns of livelihood of millions of people.  1.7 million 
people who died of heart disease, diabetes, stroke, and cancer last year because of easily 
attributed to a number of academic studies to their eating meats.  My question is, 
wouldn't reducing meat production significantly reduce overall agricultural production 
requirements? 
 
John Donvan: 
I'm going to pass on the question with respect because it's really -- I don't think it's on our 
topic of organic food and marketing hype.  It's a question about meat versus vegetables, I 
believe. 
 
Male Speaker: 
If the question is about subsidy, we're talking about how people are not getting access to 
make an even playing field for organic foods.  And meat is a huge -- 
 
John Donvan: 
I think we're off topic.  But with respect, thank you.  Yes, right there.  Thank you. 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 24 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

 
Female Speaker: 
I am a member of the media.  I work at Martha Stewart Living, and I worked on 
cookbooks.  But I have a question.  One of the things that hasn't been addressed here at 
all tonight is the question of flavor.  We're talking about marketing hype.  It's hard to get 
away from the fact that an organic banana tastes like a banana, or an organic peach takes 
like a peach.  And, you know, that’s less and less true of conventional produce. 
 
John Donvan: 
So what's the question?  No, but it's better organic, which is good. 
 
Female Speaker: 
The question is where is -- you know, where is the hype if we're really looking at flavor? 
 
John Donvan: 
Are you actually -- your question really is, does an organic taste food better, and isn't that 
one of its benefits? 
 
Female Speaker: 
Yes. 
 
John Donvan: 
Right?  Okay.  Fair question. 
 
Female Speaker: 
I guess that's what is the question. 
 
John Donvan: 
Fair question.  Fair question. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Yeah. 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
John, believe it or not, this question actually is germane to the debate. 
 
John Donvan: 
I agree that it is.  I just want the other side to answer it. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
I'll come back to it, though.   
 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 25 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

Dennis Avery: 
I have been privileged to watch a program taped by a couple of comedians who perform 
primarily in Las Vegas who conducted a number of blind taste tests on the street in Las 
Vegas.  And nobody could tell the difference from nothing.  I grew up on a farm.  Our 
tomatoes, during the height of the growing -- of the harvest season, were wonderful.  The 
rest of the year, we didn't get tomatoes except out of cans.  This whole freshness thing, 
fresher tastes better.  If your organic is fresher, it may taste better.  But that's apart from 
its being organic. 
 
John Donvan: 
Charles. 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
I think -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Charles Benbrook. 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
I think this is -- I really appreciate this question because it's very important.  The organic 
food industry has not claimed that organic food tastes better.  And the reason that -- they 
know it does sometimes, but they don't have the systems in place and the ability to 
guarantee a consumer that it's always going to taste better.  And it's an example of where 
the industry has not gone over that line to hype its products.  Now, there're some 
consumers out there that are convinced that it always tastes better.  And maybe to them, it 
does.  But I actually think the organic food industry has been fairly responsible in not 
getting beyond the science and beyond what they can guarantee. 
 
And I think that they deserve a certain degree of respect for this.  And they certainly 
deserve your vote to this motion because they haven't gone out of their way and made 
claims.  Now, some people say -- you know, some consumers -- the woman that John 
spoke about, being guilty about not eating organic food.  That's a shame.  You know, all 
mothers should feed their kids lots of fruits and vegetables, organic or conventional.  But 
you can't hold that against the industry that's trying to be responsible in telling people 
about what the true benefits are and they are significant. 
 
John Donvan: 
Okay.  So we're in the question-and-answer section of this Intelligence U.S. -- we're in 
the question-and-answer section of this Intelligence Squared U.S. debate.  I'm John 
Donvan of ABC News, your moderator.  And we have six debaters, two teams of three, 
debating this motion, "Organic food is marketing hype."  We're going back to the 
audience for questions.  Gentleman in the blue shirt. 
 
Male Speaker: 
Hello.  This question is for Dr. Rangan.  You talked about the fact that -- or you claim 
there was a fact that organic food could be verified, and there were standards for organic 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 26 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

food.  My understanding is that's not true, that the standards are for organic farming and 
that there's a difference between process and product and that the standards do not say 
anything about the products.  It's just the process by which the product is obtained.  So 
my question for you is, if I gave you an apple, and you had to do an analysis to determine 
whether it was organic or not, and it was a scientific analysis, presumably a chemical or 
physical analysis, what exactly would you do to verify that it was an organic apple? 
 
[applause] 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
Yeah, your point is well taken.  It is production.  It's the Organic Food Production Act.  
And it's about production.  And the seal is on the food, and it is about what goes into the 
production of that apple or that orange.  And just incidentally, there's also a whole 
scientific advisory board that reviews and approves materials that are allowed and printed 
in processed foods as well as in fresh foods.  So there is a whole framework around that.  
And that's what we're here to talk about today.  That is the foundation of what it is.  How 
would you test for a food that was organic?  You might look for genetic modification.  
That's prohibited. 
 
Male Speaker: 
[inaudible] 
 
John Donvan: 
If it's a banana, we can taste it. 
 
[laughter] 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
In fact, your point goes -- it's very difficult to test for whether something's organic or not.  
If it had prohibited residues, you might know that it wasn't.  But the point is -- and that's 
why there is so much recordkeeping involved.  There is so much work involved for a 
farmer to become organic because the whole paper trail of what went into that farm has to 
be documented.  Everything that went into the particular jam that was processed has to be 
documented.  Those things aren't required for conventional agriculture. 
 
John Donvan: 
John -- 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
And the materials used are restricted.  And -- 
 
John Donvan: 
John Krebs to respond. 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
-- that is the framework that exists. 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 27 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

 
John Krebs: 
It's a very interesting question.  When I was head of the Food Standards Agency, we 
started sponsoring research to develop such tests.  And such tests can be developed 
because this is a bit of technical chemistry.  The isotopes of carbon and nitrogen that 
come from chemical fertilizers are different from the isotopes out of manure or compost.  
But the organic movement strongly opposed this, and they said it was a complete waste 
of money to develop these tests.  They never said why they thought it was a complete 
waste of money.  But I thought I had a pretty good idea that a lot of the produce that's on 
sale as organic is not actually genuinely organic. 
 
And I think it would be a good thing if the regulators did use tests like that and really 
showed what was on sale in the shops. 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
Well, John, I think you should speak for the U.K. on that because there's a lot of us that 
follow what goes on in the United States.  The organic label has meaning in this country. 
 
John Donvan: 
Let's go back to the audience for questions. 
 
John Krebs: 
Does the regulator carry out the tests? 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
No. 
 
John Donvan: 
Ma'am, can you see me looking at you? 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
They enforce the rules. 
 
John Donvan: 
If you could stand up, yes, and we'll bring a microphone.  And if -- it'll be handed down 
to you.  You don't need to work your way up.  Question, please, now. 
 
Female Speaker: 
Yes, question.  Thank you.  My question is that for people who are interested in 
sustainably produced agriculture, there's some consumer concern that the rise of 
industrial organic agriculture, which was touched on briefly, has sort of called into 
question the rigorous standards that are in place for determining whether something is 
organic or not.  And I was hoping the panel could speak to that.  How rigorous it is and if 
-- 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 28 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

I know people -- 
 
John Donvan: 
[unintelligible] 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
I know people who have compared factory chicken production in the conventional way of 
doing it and in the organic way of doing it.  Now, it's still about factory chicken 
production.  But it is, number one, the chickens don't have to have access to the outside.  
They have to have been outside.  If you have something that passes the organic tests, it 
gets the approval of a certifier, who is also certified by the Department of Agriculture, 
there was nothing you're going to have to fear about the food.  Raising animals in a 
humane way --  I go to the green market twice a week. 
 
There are people who raise animals in a conventional humane way.  But most 
conventional agriculture does not do that.  And I would say that the organic movement 
should receive -- that's why you have to pay more because it -- 
 
John Donvan: 
But ma'am, are you -- 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
And we're getting very bad karma by eating this -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Ma'am, are you asking do we know -- are you asking do we really know how rigid the 
rules are and whether they're being followed? 
 
Female Speaker: 
Yes. 
 
John Donvan: 
You're asking -- 
 
Female Speaker: 
Some of the regulations are in place in organic -- when people buy organic, they assume 
that -- 
 
Female Speaker: 
Excuse me, can we pass her a microphone?   
 
John Donvan: 
I'll repeat it for her.  Oh, I'm sorry.  You want to -- 
 
Female Speaker: 
Sure.  When people are -- 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 29 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

 
Female Speaker: 
Can we pass the microphone? 
 
Female Speaker: 
Yeah, sorry.  My question is, when you're buying organic, you're assuming certain things 
about the production of the food.  And when things are produced on farms that can be 
considered factory farms when they're such large scale, can the standards be scaled up to 
some of the sizes of farms that we're seeing? 
 
John Donvan: 
Okay.  I'm going to let Blake take the question, but I don't quite understand it, so if you 
could rephrase it. 
 
Blake Hurst: 
Well, yeah.  There's a whole lot of -- I mean, at what size does my farm get too big to be 
moral?  I mean, what size farm is immoral?  When do I become industrial? 
 
Female Speaker: 
Confined animal feeding operations. 
 
Dennis Avery: 
I think it's useful to point out that if we're talking about the chickens being indoors or 
outdoors, the reason we get flu every year is from Asia where most of the chickens and 
ducks are still kept outdoors and they are wandering up and down the street of the village, 
and it is the interaction between humans -- 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
But that's in Asia. 
 
Dennis Avery: 
-- and those animals that we get the Asian flu.  We get cholera from hogs. 
 
We had -- this is historic.  Most of our epidemic diseases have come about through this 
close interaction of people and animals, and modern confinement production is protecting 
you from those diseases. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
Okay, Urvashi, so we're talking about -- 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
Okay.  I'm sorry, Dennis, that is just garbage. 
 
[laughter] 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 30 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

 
Urvashi Rangan: 
That is not the case. 
 
[applause] 
 
Dennis Avery: 
So you -- 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
I'm sorry.  Confined animal feeding operations -- I don't know if anybody's heard about 
lagoon pits of poo the size of a great lake that exists, and these are bacterial cesspools for 
lots of viruses.  The H1N1 was a mixture of bird, pig, maybe something else.  We have 
huge hog farms in North Carolina.  We have huge problems with bacterial problems 
down there from the poo pits.  This doesn't just come from China.  We've got the problem 
right here with industrialized agriculture in this country. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Gentleman with the beard. 
 
Male Speaker: 
Hello. 
 
John Donvan: 
Could you stand up, please? 
 
Male Speaker: 
Sure, hi.  Mr. Hurst, you really caught my attention when you said that organic 
agriculture should stop aligning itself with celebrity actresses and start talking to farmers.  
Michael Jackson, Ray Charles, Brittany Spears, Beyonce, Christina Aguilera -- 
 
John Donvan: 
All right, all right, I need a question. 
 
Male Speaker: 
-- Mariah Carey -- my question to you is, should we really be thinking twice and flipping 
the question around to say, is chemical food marketing hype?  Those names I read by the 
way to give you some context are Pepsi spokespersons that I have seen on television in 
my lifetime.  Thank you. 
 
[applause] 
 
Male Speaker: 
And Pepsi is made from corn. 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 31 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

 
[talking simultaneously] 
 
Blake Hurst: 
Was there a question? 
 
Male Speaker: 
Yes.  
 
John Donvan: 
Well, his question was, is conventional farming marketing hype, and given that actually 
your team has claimed a superiority in several areas for conventional farming, I think it's 
a fair question. 
 
Blake Hurst: 
Okay, yeah. 
 
[applause] 
 
Blake Hurst: 
Well, then, of course, the answer would be no. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
I love a pithy answer.  White shirt?  Right behind you.  This is our last question.  The part 
of the marketing that I'm interested -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Can you stand up, please? 
 
Male Speaker: 
Sure.  The part of the marketing that I'm interested in hearing about is the health oriented 
marketing that could be either viewed as hype from the one side or not from the other.  
And what I had a hard time following was the notion that on the one side that defended 
organic food, organic farming, there was a listing of 80 scientific papers that proved the 
health benefits of organically produced food.  And on the other side there was a lack of 
trust in the scientific data.  So I was hoping that we could actually talk just briefly about 
one, just pick one of the 80 that says there's no doubt that there are health-related benefits 
to organic food, and then just ask the other side why that's not accurate. 
 
[applause] 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
Sure.  The "British Journal of Medicine" published a study about two years ago that 
showed that children born to mothers who consume predominantly organic milk and meat 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 32 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

during pregnancy with its elevated levels of conjugated linoleic acids, which are a heart 
healthy fat, had lower -- the children had lower levels of eczema.  It was really the first 
time an actual health benefit in humans from consuming organic food has been proven 
and published in a peer review journal.  And, of course, this is for any health problem.  
So many different things affect health.  It's very unusual to be able to trace a disease or -- 
to a single part of our lifestyle.  So that's one study that came out, and it hasn't been 
refuted. 
 
20:14:38 
 
John Donvan: 
All right.  Let's hear the other side respond. 
 
John Krebs: 
Yeah. 
 
Dennis Avery: 
Did you say that was the first that's come out after 80 years? 
 
John Donvan: 
No, no.  He said it's one that's come out. 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
A study proving a health benefit in humans, when I said before that there're 80 studies, 
those are studies comparing the nutrient levels in organic food to conventional food.  
Now, there're a lot of people that feel eating more nutrients really doesn't make you any 
healthier, but you got to wonder why the U.S. government is spending so much time and 
energy trying to get us to eat more fruits and vegetables. 
 
John Donvan: 
John Krebs. 
 
John Krebs: 
Well it’s very simple.  In that study as in many others, it’s very difficult to tease apart the 
contribution of different factors.  There’s no clear proof in that study that the benefits that 
Chuck has alluded to were to do with eating organic foods, because there are a lot of 
other differences between the comparison population.  So we still don’t have any 
evidence that organic food is healthier food for you. 
 
John Donvan: 
And that concludes round two of this debate. 
 
[Applause] 
 
John Donvan: 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 33 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

And here’s where we are.  We are about to hear closing statements from each debater.  
They will be two minutes each and it’s their last chance to change your minds and from 
the audience vote before hand, we know where you stood for before the debate began.  
Here’s what we have.  Our motion is “Organic food is marketing hype.”  Before the 
debate, 21 percent of you were for this motion, 45 percent were against and 34 percent 
were undecided and we’ll ask you to vote again shortly and we’ll ask you in that way to 
pick our winner as this debate concludes just a few minute from now.  But now onto 
round three, closing statements from each team in turn.  Speaking first against the 
motion, organic food is marketing hype, Charles Benbrook, chief scientist at the Organic 
Center. 
 
Charles Benbrook: 
Thank you, John.  As I said before, this is about the claims or the positive attributes that 
are used in labeling and advertising, educational material on websites to convince 
consumers to buy more organic food.  That’s what we’re talking about.  The claim that is 
most common and most known to Americans is about the reduction, significant reduction 
in pesticide use and risk that’s associated with organic farming; that’s kind of a no-
brainer. 
 
Organic farmers don’t apply any of the dangerous pesticides that we have a huge program 
in the EPA to deal with.  And they don’t use any of the pesticides that are causing all the 
problems with bees.  They don’t use any of the herbicides that are castrating male frogs 
and feminizing them all throughout the Midwest.  They just don’t use them at all; it’s 
prohibitive.  And that prohibition is embodied in the regulations.  In terms of animal 
drugs and in particular, antibiotics and growth promoting hormones, hormones that push 
animals to produce more quickly, organic farmers can’t use them.  It’s against the rules 
and that’s again, embodied in the standards.  So when a company promotes organic food 
as better for animals, this is one of the reasons.  The other claim that is ubiquitous is that 
organic farming is better for the environment.  The U.S. Department of Agriculture has 
agreed with us.  Organic farmers build soil; they add humus to the soil; they reduce 
greenhouse gasses; they reduce the loss of nitrogen into the groundwater.  They promote 
bio-diversity; they don’t kill bees; they don’t kill frogs; they don’t kill beneficial insects.  
And again this suite of benefits are embodied in binding, enforceable regulations that a 
part of the rules.  So please don’t buy into the arguments of the other side that because 
organic farming can’t feed the world and all these other claims, that you should vote for 
this motion. 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Charles Benbrook.  Our motion is organic food is marketing hype and 
summarizing his position for the motion, John Krebs, principal of Jesus College, Oxford 
and former chairman of the U.K.’s Food Standards Agency. 
 
John Krebs: 
I just want to make two points very briefly.  First of all, we haven’t really discussed what 
is organic food?  When I was head of the Food Standards Agency, I asked to meet with 
the organic food sector.  Ten people turned up and I said okay, I just want to talk to one 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 34 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

of you.  It turned out there were 10 different certification bodies for organic food in the 
U.K. and they all disagree with one another.  No one body would allow the others to 
represent their view because they didn’t agree on what organic food was.  So it’s one 
thing to say that there are standards that are followed, but those standards are completely 
different depending on who you talk to.  So we should be clear that organic food means 
different things to different people.  And let’s go back over these questions about 
marketing hype, because whether or not their explicit claims might be made by the 
organic producers and organic marketers, they are certainly claims that people who buy 
organic food believe and accept.  And those claims are either that it’s better for you or its 
better for the environment.  We’ve heard nothing this evening that really provides me 
with convincing evidence of either of those claims.  Okay you may get more bio-diversity 
on an organic farm, but if we’re going to feed people with organic food, we need to turn 
more land into agriculture and do away with our natural parks and wildlife reserves.  Is 
that tradeoff worth making? I don't know, but we haven't heard any evidence for it this 
evening.  Do pesticides pose a risk?  Well, remember that organic farmers use 
insecticides, including one called Rotinone which is known to cause cancer in rats, is one 
of the most dangerous pesticides if you're worried about carcinogens in your food.  So if 
you're worried about pesticide risk, don't eat organic food, don't eat conventional food.  
In fact, starve to death.  Thank you. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, John Krebs. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
our motion is “Organic food is marketing hype.”  We're in the closing statement section.  
And speaking against the motion, Jeffrey Steingarten: best-selling author and food critic 
for Vogue magazine. 
 
20:20:47 
 
Jeffrey Steingarten: 
First of all, I assume that one of my debate partners, team partners, will be able to refute 
the one example given of a danger of something that's used in organic food.  There may 
be a lot of people in America who disagree about what organic food should mean.  But 
we have a law.  It's very hard to read it, and it's long.  And it's very exacting.  There have 
been issues about whether it's enforced strongly enough.  But that would mean we 
shouldn't have speed limits because some people that I know exceed them.  There's no 
doubt about the environmental dangers of conventional agriculture.  You may have read 
that in the Gulf of Mexico there is a dead zone, and it changes in size every year.  It 
appears to come from all the nitrogen that is dumped into the Mississippi River for a 
thousand, 2,000 miles all the way from Chicago.  And it gets into the Gulf of Mexico, 
and it deprives plants and fish of oxygen.  The size of the dead zone two years ago was 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 35 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

about the size of New Jersey in the middle of the Gulf of Mexico.  There is no doubt to 
me that conventional agriculture is doomed.  The only question is how soon.  There is -- 
conventional agriculture requires lots of water, an even, steady climate, a monoculture 
and none these conditions -- 
 
John Donvan: 
Your time is up.  Thank you very much. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Our motion is “Organic food is marketing hype.”  And summarizing his position in 
support of this motion, Blake Hurst, a farmer and vice president of the Missouri Farm 
Bureau. 
 
Blake Hurst: 
The longest term study and the go-to reference, if you look up organic yields, was done at 
the [unintelligible] Institute.  They had two organic plots, one which used manure as a 
fertilizer source.  We don't have enough manure to fertilize all the acres that are in crops 
today.  We would need 5 billion -- 5 billion more cows in order to produce enough 
manure to use that much fertilizer.  The other crop used a long rotation of using legumes 
and corn two years out of five, where legumes, in order to produce the nitrogen for the 
corn or the cash crop the next year.  So there you have it.  That's the final point.  Organic 
food in any given year can produce the same as conventional food.  But over that five-
year period, it only produced 60 percent as much.  60 percent as much.  Two years ago, 
we were at a 30-year low in food stocks and cereal grain stocks.  Countries were banning 
the export of rice even here in the U.S.  They limited the amount of rice you could buy 
because of the short supply.  They were trying to cut down on hoarding.  We can have 
food problems.  We can't solve them.  We can't have hunger problems.  We can't solve 
them with organic production.  We Americans take a plentiful supply of food for granted.  
And we've forgotten that the history of the world is a long search for food security.  We 
have to remember that the history of agriculture is not a long crime, not a sort of 
industrial fall from grace, but rather the greatest success story the world has ever seen.  
The advances in farming and the application of technology to production of food have 
made us better fed, safer, healthier and richer. 
 
Those are very good things, and we should give thanks for our good fortune.  And that's 
why you should vote in favor of this motion. 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Blake Hurst. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 36 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

Our motion is "Organic food is marketing hype."  And summarizing her position against 
the motion is Urvashi Rangan who is director of technical policy for the Consumers 
Union. 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
Thank you.  Our opponents have just been off topic this entire evening, and the resolution 
is not about yield and how much organic yields versus conventional.  Does it yield more 
or less?  It's not about whether organic feeds the world or not.  That's not the resolution.  
The resolution is whether it's marketing hype.  John on the other side, brought up, it 
doesn't offer health benefits.  It doesn't, so therefore it's marketing hype.  It was never 
designed to be a healthier food product for you, the human being.  It turns out there are 
some inadvertent benefits about being healthier to the environment.  And that's what it 
was designed for.  And it turns out when we're better to the environment, and we're better 
to the animals that we raise, and we don't soak these animals and the ground they're on 
with drugs and chemicals and heavy metals, it turns out that might be better for us too. 
 
[applause] 
 
Urvashi Rangan: 
And that is in fact why organic is not marketing hype.  It began as something that was 
positive for the earth.  And my opponents did not refute not a single of my first three 
points in terms of poop being fed to animals.  John, the U.K. closed up all the loopholes 
with animal feed with mad cow.  We didn't do that.  And so organic offers that tangible 
benefit.  We mitigate those exposures in organic food production.  Secondly, with 
antibiotics, we have a big problem with the resistance of bacteria at antibiotics.  Our 
opponents had no response whatsoever to that point.  There is a tangible danger 
associated with conventional production. 
 
And we feed animals heavy metals.  Just today, the inspector general of the USDA came 
out with a report showing residues of heavy metals, chemicals and drugs in meat.  It's 
there.  It's in the meat.  Organic doesn't use those things.  And therefore, organic is not 
marketing hype.  We urge you to vote against this resolution. 
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you, Urvashi Rangan. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Our motion is "Organic food is marketing hype."  And summarizing his support for the 
motion, Dennis Avery, director of the Hudson Institute, Center for Global Food Issues. 
 
Dennis Avery: 
Bruce Ames, University of California Berkeley, one of the most knowledgeable cancer 
researchers in the world, tested pesticides, tested first synthetic pesticides and found 
about half of them caused cancer in rats at high doses.  He was applauded by the organic 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 37 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

movement.  Then he started testing natural compounds and whether they caused rat -- 
cancer in rats at high doses.  And about half of them did.  And this is where Dr. Krebs got 
his point about the 46 carcinogens in the coffee.  And the actual reality is that 99.99 
percent of the carcinogens that you ingest are from Mother Nature.  They're there mostly 
in the plant foods that we eat and consume and brew.  And there if you're eating organic 
food at all this additional expense, you might be reducing your exposure to cancer by 
something on the order of 1/10,000 of 1 percent.  I was a little surprised to find that we 
were also here tonight to discuss the pig poo in the waters of the state of North Carolina. 
 
But since I have in fact analyzed the data on that particular question, I can tell you that 
there has been no change in the water quality in North Carolina since they started 
growing hogs down there.  There is a problem with the water quality below the cities 
because the sewage treatment plants don't deal adequately with the people poo. 
 
John Donvan: 
Dennis Avery, your time is up. 
 
Dennis Avery: 
Not the pig.   
 
John Donvan: 
Thank you very much.  And that concludes this intelligence squared U.S. debate. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
And now it is time to learn which side has argued best.  We are asking you in the 
audience to choose our winner.  We're asking you to go to the keypad, to the right of each 
seat.  Our motion is “Organic food is marketing hype.”  If you agree with the motion after 
hearing these arguments, press Number 1.  If you are against the motion, you disagree 
after hearing these arguments, push Number 2.  If you remain or became undecided, push 
number three.  And we will have the readout on these results almost instantaneously.  
Before we announce the results of the votes, I just want to -- first of all, I want to thank -- 
this is different from other debates that we've had in some ways. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
And I really want to thank the panels for making it so spirited and so interesting, so thank 
you to all of you. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
So I want to let you know that our next debate will be on Tuesday, May 8th.  The motion 
is “Obama's Foreign Policy Spells America's Decline.”  Panelists for the motion are 



Intelligence Squared U.S. - 38 - 4/13/2010 

Prepared by National Capitol Contracting  200 N. Glebe Rd., #710 
  Arlington, VA 22203 

Andrew Card, former Chief of Staff for President George W. Bush, and Dan Senor, a 
former Pentagon and White House advisor.  Against the motion we have Wesley Clark, a 
retired four star general who served as NATO's Supreme Allied Commander, and French 
philosopher and bestselling author, Bernard Henri Levy.  And individual tickets are still 
available by visiting our Web site and out front at the Skirball box office. 
 
You can make sure to become a fan of Intelligence Squared U.S. on Facebook and then 
you can receive a discount on our upcoming debates.  We would also like to announce 
that for the first time Intelligence Squared U.S. is going on the road.  We will be in 
Washington, D.C. for our first ever debate outside of New York City on Tuesday, June 
8th, at the Newseum.  The motion there will be “The Cyber War Threat Has Been 
Grossly Exaggerated.”  I expect to see all of you on the shuttle on the way down. 
 
[laughter] 
 
John Donvan: 
Our guests there will include top cyber security experts including the former Director of 
the NSA, retired Vice Admiral Mike McConnell.  And you can tell all of your friends in 
Washington, D.C. the tickets are on sale now through our Web site.  All of our debates 
can be heard on more than 220 NPR stations across the country.  You can also watch the 
spring debates on the Bloomberg Television Network.  Airdates and times can be found 
in your program.  And don't forget to read about tonight's debate in the next issue of 
"Newsweek" and to pick up a current issue on your way out.  One more round of 
applause, I want to thank the people who asked the questions, including those who did 
not get answers. 
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
So the results are in.  Before the debate, on the motion Organic Food is Marketing Hype, 
before the debate, 21 percent of you were for the motion, 45 percent were against the 
motion, and 34 percent were undecided.  After the debate, 21 percent remained for the 
motion, 69 percent are against, 10 percent are undecided.  The side against the motion 
wins.  
 
[applause] 
 
John Donvan: 
Congratulations to them.  Thank you from me, John Donvan, and from Intelligence 
Squared U.S. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


