
 
MEDIA TRANSCRIPTS, INC. 

41 WEST 83rd STREET  NEW YORK, N.Y.  10024   (212)  362-1481 

 

FOR Intelligence Squared US 

Rosenkranz Foundation 

590 Madison Avenue, 30th Floor 

New York, NY 10022 

DATE 4/22/09 

IT’S WRONG TO PAY FOR SEX 
Moderator:                 John Donvan 

For the motion:          Melissa Farley, Catharine MacKinnon, Wendy Shalit 

Against the motion:  Sydney Biddle Barrows, Tyler Cowen, Lionel Tiger 

 
RESULTS 

Before the debate:                                                   

For the motion:  20% 

Against the motion:  50% 

Undecided:  30% 

 

After the debate: 

For the motion:  45% 

Against the motion:  46% 

Undecided:  9% 

VOTE RESULTS BROKEN DOWN BY GENDER 

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBERS 

Before the debate: 

For the motion: 25% 

Against the motion: 41% 

Undecided: 34% 

 

After the debate: 

For the motion: 58% 

Against the motion: 34% 

Undecided: 8% 

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBERS 

Before the debate: 

For the motion: 13% 

Against the motion: 61% 

Undecided: 26% 

 

After the debate: 

For the motion: 27% 

Against the motion: 66% 

Undecided: 7% 

 

John Donvan: 

My name is John Donvan, and we will formally begin the debate 

in a couple of minutes but first I wanted to explain a couple of 

things, most particularly about your role as the audience, if you 

have been here before you know this but if this is the first time, I 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 2. 

 

 

 

wanna point out that as audience members you are actually part 

of the debate in a few different ways.   Most importantly you are 

the judges of the winners of the debate, we ask you to vote twice, 

both before the debate and again at the end, to share your—

whether or not you agree with the motion, whether you’re against 

the motion or whether you are undecided.    

 

And tonight we’re doing something a little bit more nuanced, we 

are going to ask you to vote in such a way that we can tell—we 

can tally votes from men, and votes from women, at every step of 

the way.  [LAUGHTER, VOICES]  Ah!  The way that we’ll vote, 

there’s a keypad next to your seat, attached to your seat…and if 

you are female, the numbers that concern you are 1, 2, and 3…1 

means that you are for, 1 means that you are female and you are 

for the resolution, 2 means that you are against the resolution, 

and 3 means that you’re undecided.  If you are male, you are 

concerned with the numbers 4, 5, 6.   4 means that you’re for the 

resolution, 5 means that you’re against and 6 means that you’re 

undecided, and we’ll vote…shortly after the debate officially 

begins.  Takes about 30 seconds to vote and I’ll give everybody a 

chance.    

 

…A couple more things very briefly, we are being broadcast on 

National Public Radio as all of these debates are, now on more 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 3. 

 

 

 

than 185 stations across the nation.  We are going to have two 

endings tonight, one of them will be, the ending that will be 

broadcast on radio in which we will simply, report at the end of 

the debate…the accumulated results without breaking them 

down by sex.   

 

After that we’ll have our second ending which is just for you, in 

which we’ll share what the results were by sex, how men voted, 

and by how women voted.   

 

I’d like to begin by introducing the chairman of Intelligence 

Squared US, Mr. Robert Rosenkranz.   

[APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT ROSENKRANZ 

Well thank you all very much for joining us this evening.  

Tonight’s resolution is the same language that was used in an IQ 

Squared debate in London.  And that was a very, very lively 

debate and we thought it’d be fun to, or interesting to repeat it 

here.   My role typically in these evenings is to sort of frame the 

debate, to summarize the arguments that we might expect to 

hear on both sides.  But as I thought about the language of 

today’s resolution, it seemed to me that it was not quite the crisp, 

clear proposition that we usually try to put forth. And it might be 

more useful for me to reflect a little bit on the actual words of the, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 4. 

 

 

 

of the resolution.  

 

The first the word “wrong.”  Well, it’s certainly wrong to pay for 

sex if you wanna keep your job as the governor of New York.  

[LAUGHTER]  And…you know—I predict a laugh.  But wrong in 

that sense is wrong as a matter of public morality.   And that’s 

one way of discussing right and wrong.  Another way of 

discussing it is in terms of, just private individual conduct, is this 

gonna make you feel like you’ve lived a well-lived life if you abide 

by these principles or don’t abide by these principles.  And the 

third kind of possible definition of wrong, is it should be illegal, or 

it should be legal.   So those are three different meanings of 

“wrong,” and might lead to three very different takes on tonight’s, 

resolution.  The language “to pay” is quite deliberate, because it’s 

focusing on the economically advantaged party, and that was a 

very conscious choice, both in London and by ourselves.   

 

And finally the notion of paying for sex, can encompass such an 

incredibly broad range of ideas,— from patrons of child 

prostitutes in Thai brothels, to rich Wall Streeters who support 

their girlfriends in graduate school.   So there’s such a huge 

range of meanings here, in the language of, of the resolution, and 

we have such an able group of panelists.  But I think sorting this 

out and keeping these proceedings orderly, is a difficult task 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 5. 

 

 

 

tonight and it falls to the very able John Donvan who’ll take the 

evening from here.   

[APPLAUSE]   

John Donvan:  

Thank you, and may I invite one more round of applause for 

Robert Rosenkranz.  [APPLAUSE] Ladies and gentlemen, welcome 

to another Intelligence Squared US debate, I’m John Donvan of 

ABC News “Nightline,” and I will be moderating the debaters that 

you see sharing the stage here with me at the Caspary 

Auditorium at the Rockefeller University in New York City.   Six 

debaters, two tables, three against three, will be debating this 

motion, “It is wrong to pay for sex.”  Now this is not a seminar or 

a penal discussion, this is a competition, winners and loser, it is 

a contest of ideas and logic and quick-wittedness and perhaps 

charm, but most of all, persuasion, because by the time this 

debate concludes, you the audience will have voted twice, both 

before the debate and once again at the end, your vote is to tell 

us whether you side with or against the teams on this stage and 

their arguments, and the team which has changed the most 

minds over the course of the debate, will be declared the winner.   

So now we’re gonna bring up the house lights, and we are going 

to hold our first vote and I will reemphasize for those who might 

have arrived late, tonight, we are asking men and women to vote 

using separate keys.    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 6. 

 

 

 

 

Keys 1, 2, and 3 are for women, 4, 5, and 6 are for men.  [PAUSE]  

If you are female vote 1 if you are with the proposition, 2 if you 

vote against, and 3 if you are undecided, if you are male, vote 4 if 

you are for the proposition, 5 if you are against, and 6 if you are 

undecided.   If you have made a mistake, and you regret…your 

key punch…just correct it, and we will lock in your last vote.  

And I’m seeing the faces that everybody gets this and we’re good, 

does anybody need more time?  Okay, so we’re gonna lock in the 

vote.  And proceed with the debate.  And now Round 1, arguing 

for the motion, Wendy Shalit, a writer, who has… made 

something of a career of writing about the topic of modesty, and 

seems to come up with an excellent gift for titles.   Her first piece 

for Commentary when she was a college student at Williams 

College criticizing the co-ed bathroom policy was, “A Ladies’ 

Room of One’s Own.”  And your all but last book is titled, Girl—

Girls—   

Wendy Shalit: 

The Good Girl Revolution.    

John Donvan:  

Oh, I was thinking of Girls Gone Mild.  [LAUGHTER]   

Wendy Shalit: 

Yes, that, that’s the hardcover—  [LAUGHTER]    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 7. 

 

 

 

John Donvan:  

Which—which was its previous title and it’s also brilliant.   

Wendy Shalit: 

Yes.  [LAUGHS]   

John Donvan: 

Wendy Shalit, ladies and gentlemen—   

Wendy Shalit: 

We changed it ‘cause there was some confusion.  [LAUGHTER, 

APPLAUSE]  Thank you.  Ladies and gentleman, thank you so 

much for joining us tonight to consider this most important topic.  

Before delving in I still have in my mind a song I heard on the 

way to the airport on the radio, which went like this.   “I’m not a 

saint but I’m not a sinner, everything’s cool as long as I’m getting 

thinner.”  Which, I think, expresses a profound truth, actually.  

It’s a serious question.  In a society in which the self is the body, 

to some degree, as long as we’re getting thinner, do we even 

believe that there is such a thing as a sexual right, and a sexual 

wrong.   Nobody wants to judge.  Adultery is now a lifestyle 

choice.  A 22-year-old woman from San Diego, is now auctioning 

off her virginity to the highest bidder.  Right?  And we’re not 

supposed to judge.  And yet I would submit that we do judge, all 

the time.  When I was living here in Manhattan some 10 years 

ago, I’ll never forget the time when I was innocently buying my 

Metro pass,  and sipping my coffee, and a man came up from 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 8. 

 

 

 

behind me and barked at me and he said, you know, you 

shouldn’t drink those frappaccinos, they’re very fattening.  And I 

was shocked that a perfect stranger would presume to judge my 

beverage choices that way.   

 

But then I realized that everybody has a notion of right and 

wrong and to this man frappaccinos were just wrong.  My worthy 

opponent, Sydney Barrows, writes in her memoir, Mayflower 

Madame, that a DNS in the call girl business stood for “Do not 

send.”   Men who were obnoxious or who had really gross 

apartments, she wouldn’t send her girls to such men.  And she 

also writes, “Whenever I read about a business who had done 

something I didn’t approve of, such as a building an ugly high-

rise in a residential neighborhood, I added his name to the list, 

just in case he ever called us.”  [LAUGHTER]  Which I thought 

was really funny, also.  [LAUGHTER]   To some people, building 

an ugly high-rise is morally wrong.  It’s an offense against the 

aesthetic order.  Ladies and gentlemen, I would submit to you 

that paying for sex is at least as wrong as building an ugly high-

rise.  [LAUGHTER]  Perhaps more so.   

 

Why, because we’re using— we’re talking about using a human 

being as a means to your ends.  Today people want to believe that 

paying for sex is just like paying for a hamburger.  But a sexual 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 9. 

 

 

 

transaction is different, because it teaches on the deepest, most 

personal aspects of ourselves.   The proof that sex is different, in 

my opinion, is our response to the terrible crime of rape.  If 

paying for sex were as morally neutral as paying for a hamburger, 

well then, rape is akin to just forcing someone to eat a 

hamburger.  Right?   But of course it is not.  It is a horrible 

crime, that is serious, precisely because sexuality touches on the 

deepest, most personal aspect of our humanity.  And to take 

something so intimate, and to turn it into a commodity, has far-

reaching, devastating effects, for men, women and children.   

 

Everyone agrees that after the Netherlands adopted legalization 

that this has added fuel to the gangs who trafficked in underage 

girls, and that the abuse in child prostitution exploded rather 

than was reduced.  It’s time to ask why.  Well, firstly what we 

value in women, eventually trickles down to girls.   For example 

today we place a lot of value on hotness in women, have you 

noticed this?  And so, now in, for example in the Bratts Babies 

video, which is watched by three- and four-year-old girls by the 

way, you can hear cartoon babies singing songs about “being 

hotter than hot, show what you’ve got, ready or not.”  For three-

year-olds.  What we value in women inevitably trickles down to 

girls.   Secondly prostitution, like all industries, is demand-led.  

Someone could go to great trouble manufacturing coats made 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 10. 

 

 

 

from cockroaches, but since nobody wants cockroach coats, the 

supplier would soon find that there’s no market, no demand, and 

no money in it, except may Ozzy Osbourne would buy it.   

 

But because prostitution is demand-led, it’s the paying for sex 

that’s a problem.  That’s what creates the demand, and given that 

the average age of entry into prostitution is 13 or 14 years old, I 

think this presents a huge moral problem.   I receive a ton of 

emails from girls who are 14, 15, leave home, because they’ve 

been abused, only to try to escape prostitution.  Unfortunately at 

the time, one writes to me, “It was all I felt I had to offer the 

world, my body.  As you can no doubt guess, I was molested by 

my father for many years when I was a child.   It’s why my 

mother let me leave.  So in a sense I was raised to believe my 

body had only one use, and I was worth only this one thing.”  We 

can talk later about why the molestation rates for prostitutes are 

so high, why the suicide rates are so high.   

 

But, right now I wanna focus on the fact that the problem is that 

nobody knows if these girls are 14 or 18.  And, we think about 

the sheer number of sex slaves in captivity in the US, we’re 

talking about, anything from 30,000 to 50,000.  It’s staggering, 

and it’s sickening.   We’re talking about girls that are having sex 

with 20 to 30 men per day, one girl told the New York Times 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 11. 

 

 

 

about her cell of traffickers, her captors offered three age ranges 

of sex partners, toddler to age four, age five to 12, and teens as 

well as the damage group…where they could do anything that 

they wanted.   When one of the Mexican child-trafficking rings 

was busted in a house in Plainfield, New Jersey, uh, another 

Mexican ring was recently busted--but this one was a few years 

ago—the neighbors, in retrospect thought about all the cars that 

came, and all of the girls that… left that house to buy candy, but 

they always said no one knew what was going on.   I’m always 

struck that the neighbors always say this, well somebody knew 

what was going on because someone was paying for the sex.   

 

To those who are against trafficking, but they insist that some 

women have nothing else to sell but their bodies, I say that they 

suffer from a real lack of imagination.  About the power of the 

human spirit and about the strength of women in particular and 

if you keep up with the Harvard Business Review, you may have 

noticed, that they’re now talking about micro-loans to poor 

women and only lending them, only having these loans to poor 

women.  Right?   Because they notice that the poorest of women 

reinvest in the household and the men do not.  So…we have to 

believe in the women first, it takes a risk to give them that loan.  

If instead we demand their bodies instead of appealing to their 

intelligence, it’s this philosophy of this is all she can do, and the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 12. 

 

 

 

not too subtle misogyny behind it, that feeds the demand and 

expectations that cause the problem.    

John Donvan: 

Wendy Shalit, your time is up.   

Wendy Shalit: 

Thank you—   

John Donvan: 

Thank you very much.   

Wendy Shalit: 

Thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

John Donvan: 

And again for newcomers, in the opening round each speaker has 

even minutes uninterrupted to speak so Wendy had just reached 

the seven-minute point.   Up first to speak against the motion 

that it’s wrong to pay to sex, Lionel Tiger, the Charles Darwin 

Professor of Anthropology at Rutgers University, the 

anthropologist who gave us the term “male bonding.”   He has 

been arguing more recently that it is men who get the short end 

in society.  Given, Lionel, your writing about men’s issues I’ve 

always wondered…Tiger, is that something you adopted late in 

life or were you born a Tiger.   

Lionel Tiger: 

It’s appropriate for that branch of show business known as the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 13. 

 

 

 

academic profession.  It works quite well.  [LAUGHTER]   

John Donvan: 

Ladies and gentlemen, Lionel Tiger.   

[APPLAUSE]   

Lionel Tiger: 

Thank you very much, thank you, Wendy, for starting this off in a 

serious and interesting manner.  I have to say, I’m quite 

confounded by this, because it’s quite clearly wrong to pay for 

wrong sex.   There is no one in this room I daresay, who will shed 

a tear for anyone who is jailed for trafficking in toddlers.  That I 

think is an absurdity, to start a discussion about the very 

serious, momentous issue of human sexuality.   

 

So, we’re all opposed to coercive, we’re all opposed unequivocally, 

I’m sure, to the kind of stories we hear about the Russian Mafia 

trafficking women whose passports are stolen from them and 

then they have to work off their fare and so on.  These are all 

obvious.   They’re not debatable.  I won’t debate them, therefore.  

But what we have with respect to, Wendy just heard is [sic], a 

perfect contemporary exposition of the early 20th century 

sociological fallacy, which is you look for a deviant phenomenon, 

and attribute to that the nature of the normal.   So by talking 

about rape, talking about toddlers being abused sexually, this 

then frames the entire discussion of what you guys and gals may 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 14. 

 

 

 

decide to do in your own homes with your own lust, with your 

own love, and that is simply methodologically wrong.   

 

Furthermore, it begins from a premise that legal distinctions 

constitute the vocabulary of life’s distinctions.  And again, this is 

simply methodologically improper.  So for example in American 

sociology many early sociologists would look at prison behavior 

and say ah-ha, this is what life is really like.   It’s not.  It’s a 

prison.  It’s what it is because of what it is.  It’s not reflective.  

And furthermore, I get here, and forgive me for maybe being, 

counter-casting here, but I think this entire argument somehow 

is profoundly disrespectful to females.  If you want to see people 

paying for sex, I suggest you go to the ground floor of 

Bloomingdale’s.  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]   The place is full of 

women paying for garments, colors, clasps, various instruments 

of torture—  [LAUGHTER]  lust, you name it, but they’re paying 

for their own sense of themselves as sexual creatures, and they’re 

not on that floor because they don’t like sex and they don’t like 

what it means.   

 

And furthermore, what it tells us about is, that there’s an inner 

economy to sex, that doesn’t have to do with raping toddlers, with 

raping girls who are abused by their fathers, please.  If you’re 

raped by your father you’ve got a problem independently of the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 15. 

 

 

 

one we’re discussing.   That’s just how it is.  [APPLAUSE]  There 

was a remarkable story in the Times, last couple of weeks ago, 

about a website called SeekingArrangement.com.  In this website, 

men and women can sign up to be -- essentially a rich Wall Street 

executive, thank you, Mr. Rosenkranz for the metaphor—to be 

set up and go through graduate school.   Now in this system, 

which is not explicitly about sex, it’s about a wide variety of 

things, the ratio of women applying to men, is 10 to one.  Free 

choice.  10 to one.  These are probably women you know, I know, 

who knows.  [LAUGHTER]   

 

But the fact is that—and this is just one anecdote and it’s not 

typical of everything, please don’t overextend it, but the fact is 

that women have a deal with men which requires that they have 

some relationship with men, especially if they’re inclined to 

reproduce which still 80 percent of women in North America.   

And women know that they will have five to eight years when 

they’re out of the labor force, and, it helps to have a guy around 

the place.  And so…  [PAUSE, LAUGHTER]  The fact is that if  

we’re looking just now, Mr. Donvan mentioned the current male-

female balance.   In this current recession or depression or 

whatever it’s called, 82 percent of the jobs lost are male jobs.  

That means that, women will not have a guy—if they want 

one…this is free choice, please, I’m not an obligatory 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 16. 

 

 

 

heterosexual mastermind here but if women want a mate, then 

they’re not going to have…one of those men that has lost a job.   

 

It’s a complicated argument but it’s a long story, I’m an 

anthropologist, we’re interested in what people around the world 

do, 90—over 90 percent of human marriages are arranged.  

They’re determined by families in terms of the larger interests of 

the two clans, they usually involve a bride price or a dowry, or 

something like that in which the male usually commits himself to 

sustaining the female, we don’t do it with cattle, we do it with 

some exotic unit called the diamond ring.   An engagement ring is 

the world’s stupidest object, the moment you take it out of the 

store, it’s lost 80 percent of its value, if in fact it has any value at 

all, just ask DeBeers, there’s—they’re crying.  But, the guy has to 

pay two months’ after-tax income for this diamond ring, to give to 

the gal to assure her that he’s going to be okay.  Now, if he’s not, 

she keeps the ring.   But the point is that this is a—  

[LAUGHTER]  This is a classic anthropological phenomenon, my 

time is quickly run out, I had no idea that…    

John Donvan:  

It’s up—   

Lionel Tiger: 

—it would—  [LAUGHTER]  I—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 17. 

 

 

 

John Donvan: 

Lionel, Lionel Tiger, ladies and gentlemen, whose time is up.  

[APPLAUSE]  Of all of our debaters tonight, our next speaker who 

will be arguing for the motion that it’s wrong to pay for sex has 

truly brought the arsenal of the researcher to this topic.   Melissa 

Farley is a clinical and research psychologist with Prostitution 

Research and Education which is a non-profit that she founded.  

She is an Associate Scholar with the Center for World Indigenous 

Studies,  her position on prostitution has been described as 

abolitionist and I’m assuming, Melissa, that our familiarity with 

that word and the topic of slavery is no coincidence for you.    

Melissa Farley: 

It is not.   

John Donvan: 

Ladies and gentlemen, Melissa Farley.   

Melissa Farley: 

Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  Thanks.  Some words hide the truth.  

Just as torture is named, “enhanced interrogation,” and the 

logging of old-growth forests is called the Healthy Forest 

Initiative, so also prostitution is named a choice, a job, work, a 

victimless crime, and on Craigslist it’s called “a wide range of 

personal meeting and relationship opportunities.”  [LAUGHTER]   

These pimp-messaged slogans are good for business but there’s 

not much truth to them.  What’s wrong with prostitution is the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 18. 

 

 

 

renting out of a woman’s mouth, vagina, or anus, and what it 

does to her, psychologically.   

 

What’s wrong with prostitution, and what’s wrong with buying 

sex, are the same things that are wrong with other forms of 

violence against women, incest, rape, and battery.  I’ve been 

researching prostitution for 15 years, we’ve interviewed 900 

women, men, and transgendered people in prostitution, in nine 

countries on five continents.   And over the course of that time 

we’ve also interviewed 500 johns.  Prostitution is not a choice 

because the precise conditions that make a choice are absent.  

For example, equality with buyers, and physical safety, and real 

alternatives.   If you imagine a pyramid, remember that only 

about the top 5 percent of all women in prostitution are at the top 

of that pyramid.  These are people that are privileged by race and 

class.  The other 95 percent don’t have those kinds of privilege or 

alternatives for escape.   Let me give you some examples of the 

sex inequality, the race-ethnic inequality, and the economic 

inequality in prostitution that are often invisible.  A woman in 

Lusaka, who knew that five blow jobs would get her a sack of 

mealy meal to feed her kids.  That’s not a choice.   

 

A woman in India who worked in an office where she concluded 

that she might as well be paid for the sexual harassment that 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 19. 

 

 

 

was expected of her anyway, in her job.  That’s not a choice.  The 

teen in California who said that in her neighborhood, boys grew 

up to be dealers and pimps and girls to be ‘hos.  She was the 

third generation of prostituted women in her family.   And 

prostitution more severely harms people who are indigenous or 

ethnically marginalized because of their lack of alternatives.  

That’s not a choice.  Or the young woman sold by her parents in 

a brothel in Nevada.    

 

She took six different psychiatric drugs to make it through the 

day, selling sex, that’s not a choice, or Ashley Dupre, who was 

bought by Governor Spitzer.  Dupre ran away from what she 

called an abusive home at 17, she’d been homeless, she had a 

drug problem, a convicted New York pimp bragged that he turned 

her out.   And at 17 pornography was made of her by a man who 

had a prostitution conviction.  The Emperors Club, where Spitzer 

bought her, was run by pimps who charged a lot because they 

said it was high-class call girls.  But it was the same as any other 

pimps, they took their 50 percent off the top.  Like a majority of 

johns, Spitzer most likely enticed, coerced or persuaded her with 

money to put her life on the line by not using a condom.   That’s 

not a freely made choice.  Women in prostitution face a statistical 

likelihood of weekly rape.  A Canadian woman in prostitution 

said, what’s rape for others is normal for us.  A woman at a legal 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 20. 

 

 

 

brothel in Nevada said, it’s like you sign a contract to be raped.  

And in Chicago, the same frequency of rape was reported by 

women in both escort and street prostitution.   

 

Women in prostitution are seen as body parts or fake girlfriends 

and their feelings don’t matter, and they’re not seen as human 

which is perhaps why they’re murdered at a higher rate than any 

other group of women ever studied.   The emotional 

consequences of prostitution are the same in widely varying 

cultures.  Whether it’s high-class or low-class.  Whether it’s legal 

or illegal, whether it’s in a brothel, strip club, massage parlor, or 

the street.  Symptoms of emotional distress in all forms of 

prostitution, are off the charts.  Depression, suicidality, post-

traumatic stress disorder, substance abuse, dissociation…  Two 

thirds of the women we interviewed, and all of the people we 

interviewed in prostitution, two thirds of them had PTSD at the 

same level of the most emotionally traumatized groups ever 

studied by psychologists.  That would be combat vets, women 

who had just been raped, women seeking shelter from batterers, 

and also state-sponsored torture survivors.   

 

What’s wrong with sex is what johns themselves tell us about it.  

For example, if you look at it, it’s paid rape.  She has to do what 

you want.  I use them like I might use any other amenity, a 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 21. 

 

 

 

restaurant, or a public convenience.  It’s like renting an organ for 

ten minutes.  In research interviews with johns, we found that 

their abuse of women extended to women who had not been 

prostituted yet.  The johns that bought the most women in 

prostitution were the most likely to commit sexually coercive acts 

with non-prostituting women.   When women are turned into 

objects that men masturbate into, it causes immense 

psychological harm to the person acting as a receptacle.  Please 

don’t be fooled by people who tell buying sex is just another job.  

It’s wrong to set aside a special class of women, those who are 

the most vulnerable among us, for men’s sexual use.  What’s 

wrong with paying for sex is it’s the business of sexual 

exploitation.  Thanks.  

[APPLAUSE]  

John Donvan:  

We are halfway through our opening round.  I'm John Donvan, of 

ABC News “Nightline,” your moderator.  We have heard from 

three debaters arguing this motion, “It’s wrong to pay for sex.”  

Our next debater will rise now to argue against that motion.  I 

would like to introduce Tyler Cowen, who is a professor of 

economics at George Mason University, and director of the 

Mercatus Center, a think tank that uses economic tools to solve 

real world policy issues.  And Tyler, we heard Wendy Shalit talk 

about the hamburger defense, that this is not about buying 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 22. 

 

 

 

hamburgers, that it’s different.  I'm assuming as an economist 

you're going to step back a little bit from that argument.  I 

introduce you once again to the audience, Tyler Cowen.   

[APPLAUSE]  

Tyler Cowen: 

This is a very serious matter, and to take it seriously, I propose 

we start by looking at human diversity.  Consider an example, 

you're a nineteen year old American soldier, and you’ve been 

drafted to fight the Nazis in France, and you have, to put it 

bluntly, never done it before.  And before the event of a big battle, 

you go and you buy sex from a Frenchwoman who maybe needs 

the money to feed her kids.  Or maybe you're a young man and 

you have sexual problems, and you hire a sexual surrogate to 

help you with those problems, and you go on to have a loving and 

successful marriage.  Or maybe you're a handicap person who, 

for whatever reasons finds that a better way to achieve sexual 

ends is to pay for sex.  These are all examples of the diversity of 

the human condition.  What the other side is neglecting is this 

diversity, a diversity of individuals, a diversity of situations, a 

diversity of cultures.   

 

If you look at the broad sweep, the history of mankind, there’s a 

big, long book by Nils Ringdahl on the history of prostitution.  He 

looks at Medieval India, he looks at the Tang Dynasty, he looks at 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 23. 

 

 

 

Renaissance courtesans, and what you find is a wide variance of 

outcomes.  You find a lot of cases where things go fine, and you 

find a lot of cases where things don’t go fine.  I propose what we 

have here is a human activity which very frequently is badly 

regulated, and when it is badly regulated, you will see massive 

amounts of abuse, unfairness, exploitation.  And I recognize the 

other side in pointing out these abuses.  But the problem is that 

it is a badly regulated activity.  There are many, many cases, 

three of which I’ve outlined, where consenting adults meet, they  

meet voluntarily, both of them are better off, and buying of the 

sex is not wrong.  All of the abuses listed by the other side you 

can find in another institution called marriage.   

 

If you go around the world and go to poorer cultures and ask 

within marriage how often is there rape, how often is there abuse, 

exploitation, unequal terms all the way down the line, women 

who are too young to be married, you see this happen all the 

time. But to go back to our resolution, the correct answer is not 

to condemn marriage, to say that marriage is wrong.  In a way 

you can think of prostitution as a bit like, dare I say, banking.  

As we know here in New York, banking is very frequently badly 

regulated. And you find in many countries, believe it or not right 

here in Manhattan, you find examples of abuses, fraud, 

exploitation in banking.  But again, the correct attitude or answer 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 24. 

 

 

 

is not to say that all banking is wrong.   

 

There’s simply a category error being made by the other side in 

this debate.  And again, think back to your core intuitions, there 

are many, many cases, millions, billions of cases in human 

history where informed, consenting adults have gotten together 

and someone has bought sex from another person.  And again, I 

am submitting that these cases are not wrong.  Go take a look at 

New Zealand, where prostitution is legal.  It has been legal since 

2003.  The other side didn't mention New Zealand at all.  There’s 

a big long report written by the New Zealand government about 

how this experiment has gone.  Uh, there’s a lot of evidence that 

it’s actually gone pretty well.  A survey of the prostitutes revealed 

that seventy-three percent of them do it to pay household 

expenses, twenty-four percent of them are doing it to pay for 

education, thirty-eight percent are doing it to help out their 

children, or support an older family member, and the rates of 

abuse, coercion, and rape, the rate of rape is extremely low.   

 

It seems to be lower in prostitution than in a lot of other settings.  

But again, these are not the examples you're hearing.  The point, 

again, that I'm stressing is this diversity, that when you have 

consenting adults there are, again, many cases where it’s simply 

possible that it is a okay thing to do. There are many other 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 25. 

 

 

 

sectors of the economy that we can look at.  If you ask the 

Bureau of Labor Statistics, what is the most dangerous job in the 

United States, at least according to the bureau, it’s being a 

fisherman and going out on a fishing boat.  It’s an extremely 

hazardous occupation.  There’s a lot of loss of life, loss of limb, 

people being crippled, unfair conditions, illegal immigrants who 

work under conditions that are not right.  

 

And again, these are real problems.  But to think of it in terms of 

morality, we ask, what is the moral issue here?  The moral issue 

is when you have unsafe fishing boats, or when fishing is not 

regulated properly, or when we as society don’t think about 

fishing and industrial safety in all the right ways.  No one thinks 

to say fishing is wrong, buying fish is wrong, fishing boats are 

wrong.  Again, it is simply this category error.  I would even 

submit that if we take the point of view suggested by the 

opposition, the more we try to blackball, ban, condemn an 

activity that we all know has existed in every society, it always 

pops up, there is always a black market, there are many different 

ways of trading sex.  It is not going away.  If there’s one thing that 

we all should realize in this room, is that the buying of sex is not 

going away.  What we want is that it happen in a better way 

rather than a worse way.  We need to have a constructive 

attitude.  [APPLAUSE]  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 26. 

 

 

 

 

I do not hear that constructive attitude from the other side.  What 

I hear is an attitude that will put this practice under a greater veil 

of secrecy, it will make it harder for the people who are selling to 

go to the law when they have problems, it will make it more of a 

social disgrace, and it will worsen the problems with the working 

conditions rather than improve it.  I’d also note, just as an aside, 

just how culturally-bound and institution specific the complaints 

are.  For instance, in Melissa Farley’s presentation, it’s always 

man and woman, man buying from woman.  There’s no talk of 

gay prostitution, there’s not much talk of the broader sweep of 

human history, of practices of dowries, of the numerous tribes in 

human history who have taken very different attitudes than that 

which we hold.  In fact, if you polled the majority of human 

beings over time, the most likely answer you're going to hear is 

that the people who are doing something wrong are the men who 

are trying to get sex without paying for it simply by seducing the 

woman.  Anyway, thank you all.   

[APPLAUSE]  

John Donvan:  

Tyler Cowen, with a very good sense of the clock.  Our next 

speaker is speaking for the motion that “It is wrong to pay for 

sex,” it’s interesting in the context of a debate, is actually 

somebody who has changed the terms of debate in this country 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 27. 

 

 

 

in a way that has changed all of our lives, Catharine MacKinnon, 

a professor of law at the University of Michigan, and also 

Harvard, pioneered the legal claim for sexual harassment as sex 

discrimination.  Catharine also has been arguing on behalf of 

women raped in Bosnia, making the argument that rape was a 

form of genocide.  And Catharine, the result of that trial?  You 

won.   

Catharine MacKinnon: 

We won seven hundred and forty-five million dollars in the 

southern district of New York before a jury like you.   

[APPLAUSE]  

John Donvan:  

Ladies and gentleman, Catharine MacKinnon.   

Catharine MacKinnon: 

What I know about prostitution I know from the prostituted 

women that I work for, representing them because they asked me 

to.  We have found the sanctimoniousness and the superiority of 

the moral position against prostituted people, that is that they 

are bad, to be insulting and insufferable.  And we have also found 

the rescue impulse to be demeaning and typically ineffective.  

But, no one opposes the normal business of prostitution for 

money, that is of sex for money, more, or more eloquently than 

the women who really know what it is because they're living it.   

 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 28. 

 

 

 

That is the women who are living in this industry, most of whom 

are trafficked by international definition, because they are being 

pimped.  And they want to get out, and they can't.  Thus fitting 

the international definition of slavery.  When you want to get out 

of marriage there’s a term called divorce.  Eighty-five percent of 

women, when asked what they most want, that is women in 

prostitution, say what they want is to get out, but they don’t 

know how to.  Usually they got in as children.  Normally they got 

in as children.  The majority.  They were, most of them, sexually 

abused, actually, even before that.  This is in the ninety percent 

plus range.   

 

That is, they were treated as a thing for sex before they ever had 

a chance to become a person first.  And usually they are women, 

meaning their economic options are limited already by sex 

discrimination, precluding a vast majority of what men do for 

better pay, leaving, for the women who end up in prostitution the 

one remaining thing to be called her choice.  This is a myth that 

one woman described for herself as, to be able to get out I had to 

believe I chose to get in.  Sex, when it’s right, like friendship, is 

its own reward, it’s mutual, it’s equal in its diversity.  You can't 

buy the real thing.  In prostitution, women have sex with men 

they would never otherwise have sex with.  The money thus acts 

as a form of force, not as a measure of consent.  It acts like 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 29. 

 

 

 

physical force does in rape.  And as Kathleen Barry put it, the 

only difference between rape and prostitution is time, one ends, 

the other doesn't.  And then she is stigmatized and deprived of 

dignity by society, and criminalized by the legal system.  So for 

her, what’s wrong with it is, it’s abusive, it’s intimately violative, 

it’s destructive, it’s damaging, it’s dangerous, it’s exploitative, and 

it’s unequal.  It’s up to you to decide if this is right or wrong.   

 

We're not here, actually, to discuss the proposition “it’s wrong to 

be paid for sex.”  We are here to discuss the proposition, “it is 

wrong to pay for sex.” I’ve just been talking about what’s wrong 

with it for her.  What’s wrong with it for him is, he’s using her, 

he’s exploiting her, he’s exploiting his inequality to her, which is 

usually a desperate economic inequality.  In order to have access 

to her person in a form of bodily invasion, while he gets off on the 

illusion that he has chosen this freely, when he is taking more 

than can ever be paid for.   [APPLAUSE]  And what he is buying is 

not only that chunk of her humanity called self-respect…  And it 

isn't sex only, it’s you do what I say, sex.  Now, to be against this 

is why those of us who are today supporting this proposition 

support the Swedish model.  In this model, the seller is, well, the 

buyer is strongly criminalized.  The seller has, is also strongly 

criminalized.  In criminalizing the person who is the one who’s 

buying the sex, you are criminalizing the one that my desperately 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 30. 

 

 

 

poor Indian clients, from India, call the real criminal.   

 

And you de-criminalize the sold.  You couple this with real 

education, real employment opportunities, real jobs, real money.  

Women are entitled to real equality and real choices.  Men 

presumably also need to pay for household expenses to put 

themselves through school, and you don’t find them, in general, 

not in anything like the numbers you find women, selling 

themselves on street corners.  Women need real equality and real 

choices.  We're asking you to vote yes for the proposition as a way 

to weigh in on the side of the view that women and children are 

not for sale.  [APPLAUSE]  And I'm going to reserve the balance of 

my time for my rebuttal.   

[APPLAUSE]  

John Donvan:  

We’ll remember that.  Thank you.  And that concludes round one 

of the debate tonight.  [AUDIENCE REACTION]  Oh, I am so 

sorry, I skipped ahead on a card.  I'm so glad that you're all 

here… [LAUGHTER]  …to keep me on the straight and narrow.  

I'm sorry, Sydney.  Sydney Biddle Barrows is a successful 

businesswoman and consultant who is most known for her work 

running a prostitution ring called Cache in the early 1980’s for 

about five years until her arrest.  The tabloids were particularly 

drawn to the fact of your lineage, which you have captured in the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 31. 

 

 

 

title of the book you wrote about your experience as The 

Mayflower Madame.  You had how many ancestors on the 

Mayflower?   

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

Both sides, two— 

John Donvan:  

Both sides.  Okay, so you have Puritans in your past.  Ladies and 

gentleman, arguing— 

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

They're all rolling over in their graves.   

John Donvan:  

Arguing against the motion, Sydney Biddle Barrows.   

[APPLAUSE]  

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

Thank you.  Freud once asked the question, what do women 

want?  And I would argue that what women want is their own 

money.  And I have heard a lot of stories about, some really 

horrifying stories about young girls, people being trafficked, as 

Lionel said, this is just something, I mean I want them to throw 

away the key on these people.  But what’s interesting is some of 

the statistics that I’ve been hearing, because what’s interesting is 

the only people that you can get these statistics from are the 

people at the very, very bottom, and they constitute a very small 

percentage of all of the working girls, at least in the United 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 32. 

 

 

 

States.  I cannot speak for anywhere else.  And because I have to 

tell you that I don’t recognize any of the kinds of clients that the 

opposition has talked about, I don’t recognize any of the kinds of 

girls that the opposition has talked about, so let me tell you a 

little bit about the experiences that I had, and that because I 

know so many people all over the United States that run escort 

services, or that have worked as working girls.   

 

There’s tens of hundreds of thousands of them.  And let me tell 

you a little bit about a story.  First of all, who’s really taking 

advantage of who?  I would argue that it is the women taking 

advantage of the men’s need for us.  After all, who ends up with 

the money?  We do.  Who’s the one who sets the price?  We do.  

They're the ones who shell out because they want what we have.  

And if they don’t want to pay it, then they don’t get it.  I mean, 

that's, it’s as simple as that.  So, I just, and by the way, can I just 

say that building an ugly building affects millions of people over 

hundreds of years, so… [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE] …so I didn't 

feel bad…  But that was something just, she’s right, it absolutely 

offended me.   

 

I just, there’s some, a lot of ugly buildings out there. 

[LAUGHTER]  So let me tell you about some of the gals who 

worked for me, and who are fairly, this is the, first of all, most of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 33. 

 

 

 

them are students.  I did not hire anyone under the age of 

nineteen, no one I know, and I know dozens and dozens of 

madames, ever hires girls under the age of eighteen.  Never.  I 

only took forty percent of the young lady’s earnings, and they 

wanted to give that money to me.  They didn't have to.  But, I 

took the phone calls, I'm the one who set it up, I'm the one who 

checked them out, I'm the one who made sure they got the 

money if for some reason, you know, at the end of the evening he 

didn't pay, I would still pay her.  And can I tell you something, in 

five and a half years, you should pardon the expression, we never 

once got stiffed.  And we got… [LAUGHTER]  And we got the 

money at the end.  So you know, they use the word pimp, and I'm 

not saying that there aren't people out there that, that really fit 

that description, that aren't horrible people, but we’re not all like 

that.   

 

So, let me tell you about Colby.  Colby was the daughter of a 

doctor, and she was used to living a very privileged life.  She was 

in medical school, and she had several siblings who were either 

in college or medical school or law school or whatever.  And Colby 

had a thing for, you know, beautiful clothes, six hundred dollar 

boots is actually the example she gave to me.  And she came to 

work for me because she felt guilty asking her father, who had so 

many other, you know, of her siblings in school, to give her six 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 34. 

 

 

 

hundred dollars for a pair of boots. This was Colby’s choice.  But 

this is the reason she worked for me, so that she could have six 

hundred dollar boots.   

 

Sandy was a singer in a rock and roll band, and she and her 

band had finally broken through and had gotten a, a tour put 

together.  And about three months before they were supposed to 

go on tour someone broke into the van and stole all their 

equipment.  This was their chance to really be someone and 

really make it, and so everyone went to work doing something 

else, and Sandy came to work for me.  You hear, and most of the 

girls, as I said before, were students.  And the way I used to look 

at it is, here were the girls’ dreams on this side of the river.  They 

wanted to be models, actresses, dancers, singers, they wanted a 

degree, they want, I had girls who wanted to be nurses, I had 

girls who wanted to be all different kinds of things.  And, so this 

is their dream on this side of the gulch.  And here they were over 

here, and they needed the money to pay the toll to the bridge to 

get to the other side so that they could have the life that they 

wanted.   

 

And they decided, and they could have done anything else, they 

decided that they wanted to do this.  And it was their choice.  

And I know it’s going to, a lot of people are going to find this 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 35. 

 

 

 

offensive, but I don’t think there’s one single solitary girl that 

worked for me who didn't come back after the very first time and 

say, I can't believe it was so easy. I can't believe I didn't do this 

before.  I know, I know this is offensive to some people, but I 

mean, may a lightning bolt come down, this is what they said.  

And with respect to the guys, I mean, you should, we had terrific, 

we had a little Saudi prince who… [LAUGHTER]  …who wanted to 

have pillow fights, because when he was a kid he never got to 

have pillow fights.  We had workaholics who had no time for a 

personal life, especially back in the early eighties, we had 

currency traders who, you know, were awake at all different 

times.  They didn't have time for a girlfriend.  Women weren't 

going to put up with guys who were never around.   

 

I mean, these were guys that women pay thousands of dollars to 

join these matchmaking services in order to meet.  They were 

people who were between relationships, they wanted a sure thing.  

There were lonely travelers.  There’s a lot of guys out there who 

were on the road, you know, week after week after week.  They 

just want a little company.  Now, when you figure that, we 

euphemistically call it the nitty-gritty, only lasted maybe five, 

seven, eight minutes, and yet the clients kept the young ladies for 

one hour, two hour, three hours, four hours.  What were they 

really paying for?  If they, all they wanted was the sex, believe 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 36. 

 

 

 

me, they could have gotten it for a hell of a lot less, we charged 

top dollar, that that’s not all that they pay for.  A lot of them pay 

for the company, they pay because they just, they want a pretty 

girl to talk to and to have a good time with.  

 

I had a couple clients who had invalid wives who felt that it was 

cheating if they had a girlfriend, but they still had needs that 

they needed to have met.  So, while it is true that there are a lot 

of bad people out there doing bad things to girls, I think to say 

that all of these girls are abused, that all of these girls are taken 

advantage of, that they're all traumatized, yes, there are some, 

but it’s certainly not the majority, and I, believe me, I want them 

to throw away the key on these people too. But, I think to tar 

everyone with the same brush is just not being realistic, because 

there are a lot of good people out there who are doing this.  And 

to criminalize these girls, and to give them records so that they 

can't go and live a normal life just to me doesn't seem right.   

John Donvan:  

Thank you, Sydney Biddle Barrows.  That concludes round one of 

our debate.  [LAUGHTER]  I need to say that without you 

laughing at me for the radio broadcast, or you can just sit in 

silence, but I just need to say it without the laughter, because it 

would be impossible to explain to the audience, radio audience…  

That concludes round one of our debate.  [APPLAUSE]  You're, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 37. 

 

 

 

you're very kind.  What had happened, I got distracted by the 

results from the initial vote, which I find quite surprisingly 

lopsided, but we will share them with you now.  As things stand 

now, twenty percent of you are for the motion, fifty percent of you 

are against, and thirty percent of you are undecided.  And recall 

that we will have you vote again towards the end, and we chose 

the winner depending on which side has moved the most votes.  

So we’re going to move now onto round two, and in round two the 

debaters speak directly to one another, and we also take 

questions from you.  What will happen is, we have people in the 

audience who will come to you if you raise your hand.  Catch my 

attention, and I’ll signal a microphone to be brought over toward 

you.  

 

And when you take the microphone please hold it about a fist 

away from your mouth so that we can hear you in the hall, and 

also so that the radio recording can pick you up as well.  But I 

want to kick off the questions first by turning to the panel and 

saying, after hearing the opening statements I feel as though I'm 

hearing two teams debate two entirely different worlds, one in 

which, [APPLAUSE]  in one world, in one of these worlds 

prostitutes are workers.  In the other world, prostitutes are 

captives. In one world prostitutes have free choice, in another 

world prostitutes have no choice whatsoever.  And I, especially 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 38. 

 

 

 

given the description that you left us with, Sydney, of you're 

talking about young women making choices, I want to ask 

anybody from the opposing side to address that point with 

Sydney on the matter of choice.  Particularly Catharine, you had 

said that there really is no free will, if you are a prostitute it is 

never your choice.  I would like you to address that, or any of 

your teammates, to the other team.    

Catharine MacKinnon: 

I didn't say what you just said.  I said that it’s always in a context 

of sex inequality in which your options are precluded, to begin 

with, and as Melissa pointed out, there’s a dramatic amount of 

racial and class based bias in the people who are actually in this 

industry.  And you know, prostitution is what women do when all 

else fails, and all else fails often.  And there are a lot of things 

that men do, in general, when all else fails, and prostitution is 

not that thing.  And that means this is an institution of sex 

inequality.  It is.  And you know, when, but I would also note, 

that we actually agree with, that is, Miss Barrows and us concur 

in the view that the sold in this, the women, the girls, when they 

are boys or men, should not be criminals.  They should be, the 

prostituted people need to be de-criminalized, firmly.  That is the 

Swedish model.  And it’s the buyers who we’re here to talk about, 

the johns that Melissa described.  And whether, what it is, what 

it is they are doing when they are buying people.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 39. 

 

 

 

John Donvan: 

You're teammate, Melissa Farley.   

Melissa Farley: 

I would like to quote, to respond to what Sydney said, and quote 

from her book, which is, she said, “A call girl is simply a woman 

who hates poverty more than she hates sin.”  I would use the 

word prostitution and not sin, so I would say a call girl is simply 

a woman who hates poverty more than she hates prostitution.  I 

think that’s the whole point we’re making here, that shouldn't be 

the choice.  If we’re seeking an end to inequality between men 

and women, if we’re seeking an end to violence against men and 

women, women should not have to make the choice between 

poverty and education, paying the next month’s rent, and 

prostitution.   

[APPLAUSE]  

John Donvan:  

From the other side, Lionel Tiger.  

Lionel Tiger: 

I'm sorry that this whole discussion now is focused on 

prostitution.  I thought that what we were talking about was the 

economics of human sexuality, and that is really the 

parsimonious fundamental issue that we have here.  People 

engage, and I mention the engagement ring in marriages, which 

have immense responsibilities to the next generation, to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 40. 

 

 

 

communities, to relatives, to friends, and we’re somehow putting 

the immensely complex and, and both luxurious and difficult 

business of being an adult lover into the same rubric as 

prostitutes who, and I think there’s an argument to be made that 

it, yes it’s terrible, now we’re starting to hear how this all 

expresses sexual inequality and racial equality.  Please, let’s try 

to limit the discussion to the subject of human sexuality and stop 

including every single allergic category that comes into these 

discussions— 

John Donvan: 

When, when do— 

Catharine MacKinnon: 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES]  Like reality, for example?   

John Donvan: 

When, what Lionel is doing is saying that buying a diamond ring 

is paying for sex, and do— 

Wendy Shalit: 

Yeah, I think it’s actually the negative team that is equating, in 

equating marriage and dating with paying for sex.  The negative 

team is conflating things that should not be conflated.  First of 

all, in prostitution there’s no shared desire.  Right?  Which means 

one person is an object.  That's a big difference.  Also, marriages 

in which there is a transactional element, in which it’s, okay, you 

give me this, I’ll give you this, there’s a fifty-fifty exchange of 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 41. 

 

 

 

services, end up failing precisely because that’s not what a 

marriage is.  Right?   

 

But I want to address the free choice issue, because Miss 

Barrows says that she doesn't recognize any of the girls, or the 

men.  So I just want to refresh her memory.  Because I thought  

her book was really interesting.  And she said, quote, quite a few 

of the new girls that she used had no money and nothing 

appropriate to wear, so I would take them to Saks and charge 

whatever they needed on my credit card.  They would pay me 

back from their future earnings.  When she found a fabulous 

ground floor apartment for her office, which was super cheap, the 

rate was made up for by making the girls sleep with the landlord, 

who she said was only interested in one thing, and lived in a 

seedy semi-furnished apartment and made them feel cheap.  

 

She says the girls weren't crazy about the plan, and really one 

can see why.  Is that free choice?  That doesn't sound like 

empowerment to me.  To me empowerment comes from 

actualizing your unique potential in the world.  That’s what 

empowerment is.  [APPLAUSE]  Realizing you're unique, and you 

have a unique contribution to make to this world, not being 

forced to sleep with a landlord to enrich somebody else’s pockets.  

I'm sorry.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 42. 

 

 

 

John Donvan:  

Tyler Cowen, you want to come back to that.   

Tyler Cowen: 

Our moderator is a very objective fellow, and what he’s pointed 

out is that there are many different worlds here.  And this is true.  

And what I would like you to do is to think through the 

implications of there being many different worlds.  The other side 

is asking for a blanket condemnation of a practice.  I'm asking 

you to see many different worlds, to understand this diversity of 

human preference, experience, and culture.   

 

And once we view the debate in this terms, in my view, the 

correct answer is to side with us, that there is no blanket 

condemnation, it is a diverse set of situations with many entirely 

acceptable outcomes, a lot of very bad outcomes, and the other 

side is simply pressing the emotional buttons again and again 

and again on the bad outcomes, and trying to press all of our 

buttons.  And I urge you to resist that, to stand back, look at the 

bigger picture, and do not issue the blanket condemnation.   

John Donvan:  

Tyler, you're saying sometimes it’s okay to pay for sex?   

Tyler Cowen: 

There are many instances where the practice is badly regulated 

and we observe bad outcomes.  Trafficking is an example.  None 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 43. 

 

 

 

of us are defending that, but that’s not the proposition.   

John Donvan:  

Is it, to the other team, is it ever, is there a sometimes, or 

sometimes it’s okay to pay for sex?  Melissa Farley?   

Melissa Farley: 

I would like to address this trafficked toddlers issue, which is 

basically ranking victims.  When you decide that a battered 

woman is not really harmed because her arm wasn’t broken, 

or a slave isn't harmed as much if they're in the house as 

opposed to in the fields, or a woman in prostitution is not 

harmed as much if she’s a little older.  And I’d like to tell you 

that a friend of mine who works in the field of child 

prostitution recently told me that there’s now a move to only 

rank genuine victims of prostitution of children if they're pre-

pubescent.  So the age is always going down, we’re always 

carving out some group that it’s okay to use in prostitution.  I 

think when we make these false distinctions, we’re agreeing to 

set aside a class of human beings, the ones that make more, 

they're a little older, a little this, a little that.  We’re setting 

aside some people who’s suffering we agree to ignore.   

John Donvan: 

We're going to go to audience questions now and bring up the 

house lights, and begin to raise your hands, and we’ll get 

microphones over to you.  But Melissa, I don’t, in a way I think 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 44. 

 

 

 

you actually glanced off my question with what you were saying, 

but Tyler Cowen is arguing that sometimes it’s okay to pay for 

sex.  He used the example of sexual surrogates, he used the 

example, not using the word quadriplegic, but that was implied, 

that somebody who may not have an opportunity for another 

sexual experience, and therefore hires a prostitute.  And he says 

that in those cases sometimes it is okay to pay for sex.   

Wendy Shalit: 

Right— 

John Donvan: 

Wendy Shalit?   

Wendy Shalit: 

Yes, I’d like to address that, because I think those are really 

important points that he raised.  If you show me anyone who, a 

man who is handicapped, I will give you a man with the same 

disability who has a woman who loves him.  And women are not 

that superficial.  And if somebody, if, I'm sorry, there’s a lot of 

women who love men… [AUDIENCE REACTION]  And, and…  If 

there’s somebody who’s using prostitution as an excuse, I think 

that's a problem.  And I, about this issue of, that prostitution is 

really altruism because it’s feeding, you know, poor women, and 

that’s part of the diversity, I understand that, but I fail to see how 

that justifies it from the male perspective.  If you really want to be 

altruistic, just give her a loaf of bread.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 45. 

 

 

 

John Donvan: 

A question from the middle of the aisle.  And, and I beg you to 

keep it terse.  

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

Oh yeah, no, of course.   

John Donvan: 

Thanks.  

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

Hi.  So I'm in college, and I remember very distinctly that when I 

was in middle school our sexual education is a three year 

program, but there are only so many ways that you can describe, 

you know, the act of sex, so what we focused on eventually was 

disease, and I was wondering if anybody on the panel had any 

opinions about disease in this scenario, especially, I would like to 

ask specifically Miss Barrows about, if she had any experiences 

with this while she was running Cache.   

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

Back when I was in business, there was no such thing as AIDS.  

Well, there was in the gay community but no one really heard 

about it yet, because I was out of business in 1984.  The way that 

this, the upscale call girl business ran back then is, the young 

ladies did not wear condoms.  If, I mean, the men didn't wear 

condoms, and young ladies couldn't insist on it. If they did not 

agree to that, then they didn't have to work for us.  But I mean, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 46. 

 

 

 

the thing, there was pretty much nobody they could have worked 

for in the city, because that’s the way everybody did it.  I do have 

to say that we did have, once, we had a problem with gonorrhea, I 

paid for all my young ladies to go to the doctor, and I also called 

up all the other agencies that I knew were sort of in my category, 

and told them that, you know, we should, everybody should 

insist that the clients wear condoms.  And you know what these 

other women said to me, what do you care about these girls?  

They, you know, they wouldn't care this much about you.  And I 

was absolutely horrified.  So you know, there… It’s true that 

there are a lot of bad people out there who are running 

businesses like this, but there are also a lot of people out there, 

because I'm not the only one, who genuinely care about the girls 

who work for us, and would never, ever, ever put them knowingly 

in harm’s way.   

John Donvan:  

Melissa Farley do you want to also take up the question of, based 

on your research, and take up the disease question, and is it 

central to the argument?   

Melissa Farley: 

It’s not what we heard from women in prostitution that this is 

their main concern, is physical, even physical injuries.  The main 

concern is to get out and to figure out how to get out.  And the 

thing that causes them the most suffering is the psychological 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 47. 

 

 

 

damage that’s extremely long lasting.  The bruises and the--they 

even heal from the rapes.  So this is what I’ve heard.  I think 

when someone, let me, cac I say one other thing— 

John Donvan: 

Yes, please do.   

Melissa Farley: 

…about disability?  I think prejudice against someone who has a 

physical or emotional disability is wrong.  The cure to that 

prejudice is not selling someone to that person so they can have 

sex.  The cure is to address the disability-ism, and the looks-ism 

in our culture.  

John Donvan:  

I’ve told you that you’d be number two, I’d like to put you to 

number three, because I’d like to bring different sexes into the 

discussion.  And there’s a gentleman, and you’ll be third…  Yes, 

you’ll be number three.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

My question is for Professor Cowen, there was a case in 

Germany, I actually don’t know what the outcome was, but 

assuming that this is a country where there is well regulated 

prostitution, where a woman was denied unemployment benefits 

because she had not tried to become a prostitution.  So, my 

question for you is, if prostitution, is if we’re going to have a well 

regulated prostitution, is it going to be treated like any other 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 48. 

 

 

 

profession?  Because if so, obviously every woman always has 

that alternative, and therefore the state can ask women to 

become prostitutes instead of getting unemployment benefits.   

[APPLAUSE]  

Tyler Cowen: 

My understanding of the German story is that it’s quite different 

from how you described it, that the woman simply was given a 

list and asked what other professions she had tried to seek out, 

that she was not in any way forced to become a prostitute.  But 

putting that example aside, if indeed that were the case, that is 

an example of a silly rule, a silly regulation.  None of us here are 

for that.  But pointing out that that’s a silly way of running 

unemployment benefits does not establish the blanket 

condemnation behind this principle.   

John Donvan:  

Does the opposing team have a response to that?  No?  Ma'am, 

your turn.   

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

Norma Ramos [PH] from the Coalition Against Trafficking in 

Women.  My question I would like to have addressed by Dr. 

Farley and Catharine MacKinnon.  We keep hearing that the 

solution is better regulation.  I’d like you both to address what 

the real experiences are in the countries such as the Netherlands 

and Germany that are regulating the commercial sexual 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 49. 

 

 

 

exploitation of women, which we at the coalition against 

trafficking in women refer to as the world’s oldest oppression.   

John Donvan:  

Catharine MacKinnon.   

Catharine MacKinnon: 

Yeah, Germany is actually thinking about the Swedish model at 

this point, having discovered that a tremendous amount of 

trafficking is produced by the draw of legalization.  And that’s the 

same as in the Netherlands, although they're not considering the 

Swedish model at this point, but are looking to try to address the 

abuses that happen as a direct result of their legalization, across 

the board legalized initiatives.  The other thing that happens in 

countries, for example, or in parts of countries like Australia 

where you regulate it better, that is in the interest of trying to 

reduce the violence and the illness and other forms of abuses of 

the people, women in prostitution, you create a legal industry so 

you can regulate it well, that’s their whole attempt.  What ends 

up happening, you know, apart from the fact that you can't put 

anything in the rooms like pillows because they're a lethal 

weapon, or sheets, because somebody might get tied down by 

them, so it’s a pretty bare prostitution experience.  What happens 

is that the men who want to buy all the things that are abusive 

and dangerous and destructive to the women, in addition to the 

psychological, which remains the same, go to the ever-exploding 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 50. 

 

 

 

illegal industry around it.  Right?  So you legalize it in the name 

of having a well regulated prostitution industry, and exploding 

around it is the illegal industry for which there is no legal 

structure to address, for all the men who, to begin with, want to 

have sex without condoms.   

John Donvan:  

Tyler Cowen, your opponent, does that mean you're, you have 

been arguing that it can be regulated to safety and— 

Tyler Cowen: 

[OVERLAPPING VOICES, UNCLEAR]  

John Donvan: 

Go ahead.  

Catharine MacKinnon: 

Apparently he’s a lot smarter than, you know, several hundred 

years worth of other people who have tried to regulate and who 

have a million different ideas about how to do it.  [AUDIENCE 

REACTION]   

John Donvan:  

Tyler Cowen.   

Tyler Cowen: 

I spoke at length about New Zealand, there’s a several hundred 

page study about the experience which I have read.  The other 

side has not uttered a peep about this, and even in the example 

of Germany, it’s just been admitted, the real problem is the illegal 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 51. 

 

 

 

trade, which in some way should be de-criminalized.  The 

European model can be improved, but for the most part the 

Western European model has worked better than what we do 

right here.  This is widely understood throughout the world.  

[APPLAUSE]  

John Donvan:  

Melissa Farley.   

Melissa Farley: 

I actually have read the New Zealand report, and I also have 

studied prostitution in New Zealand, and one of the things that 

happened in New Zealand is what a Maori community activist 

called an apartheid system of prostitution.  In New Zealand, the 

Maori people are prostituted much younger and much longer, 

and they're more frequently homeless, so we again have that 

situation in New Zealand of a special class of people who are 

more vulnerable— 

John Donvan:  

But Melissa are, are you saying that regulation can never wipe 

out abuses, or do you just not like the idea anyway?   

Melissa Farley: 

Well, let’s talk about the regulation.  What happens in real life in 

New Zealand, to stick with that for a moment, is that zoning is 

the sine qua non of regulation of prostitution.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 52. 

 

 

 

John Donvan: 

You mean where, where an establishment is, where it happens?   

Melissa Farley: 

The people who have a lot of money don’t want it in their 

backyards, so it’s zoned into the neighborhoods of poorer people, 

thereby increasing trafficking, johns, solicitations, and their 

general vulnerability to all aspects of the sex industry.  This 

happened in New Zealand, so— 

John Donvan:  

But the clarification I'm looking for is that— 

Melissa Farley: 

Sorry.  

John Donvan: 

…if Tyler is right, and ultimately a system could be, of regulation 

could be developed to avoid the sorts of abuses that have been 

talking about, would that be okay with you?   

Melissa Farley: 

I, what…  Here’s the answer to that… [APPLAUSE]  It’s counter-

intuitive.  It’s been tried, and it didn't work.  The Mayor of 

Amsterdam said, and I think this is true of many people, we 

thought it would work to regulate.  Well-intentioned people 

thought it would work to regulate, and it didn't.  It actually, it’s 

very counter-intuitive.  He said, what, they're shutting down over 

a third of the legal brothels in Amsterdam right now.  Why?  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 53. 

 

 

 

Because eighty percent of the women in Dutch legal prostitution 

are moved there from economically stricken Europe, and because 

there’s organized crime that’s out of control.  Legalization is a 

pimp magnet, so I mean, that’s the answer.  If we know that it 

doesn't work, it’s been tried, but— 

John Donvan: 

A, a quick, I— 

Wendy Shalit: 

Can I just respond to that, I— 

John Donvan: 

I was going to actually try to get the next question to go to you, 

how about that?   

Wendy Shalit: 

I just wanted to know, I'm just— 

John Donvan: 

I guess not. [LAUGHTER]   

Wendy Shalit: 

No, I do.  I just wanted to know, because I haven't heard the 

answer to this, on this point, if I may.  If it’s a question of being 

badly regulated, then why do we see in the countries where it’s 

been legalized, we see that the trafficking has increased.  Nobody 

has addressed my point that nobody asks the ages of the girls 

when they pay for sex, and that’s the link between the trafficking.  

And no one has addressed that so far.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 54. 

 

 

 

John Donvan:  

From the, from the black please.  Gentleman?   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

Okay, this is for the women who say it’s wrong to pay for sex— 

John Donvan: 

Let’s aim this towards one— 

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

First, just want to establish, fact, is it okay for you guys that a 

woman be a professional female masseuse and give massage 

therapy to a man.   

Wendy Shalit: 

Absolutely.   

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

Okay.   

Wendy Shalit: 

No problem with that.  

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

It is okay if a man goes to a particular masseuse because he 

finds her extremely attractive and is turned on by it, and only 

receives massage therapy?   

John Donvan:  

We’re talking slippery slope here, I think.  [LAUGHTER]   

Wendy Shalit: 

I can see it getting slippery.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 55. 

 

 

 

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

That’s, so that’s okay?  All right, third question, if during that 

process— 

Wendy Shalit: 

Not if the man were my husband.  [LAUGHS]  

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER 

If during that process…[BACKGROUND VOICE] …he has an 

orgasm, even though the woman didn't do anything out of the 

ordinary, did only professional massage therapy, is that okay?   

Wendy Shalit: 

I don’t know, I mean, I think this is a kind of…extreme example— 

John Donvan: 

This one has stymied…  [AUDIENCE REACTION]   

Wendy Shalit: 

I think what you're— 

Melissa Farley: 

I don’t think what— 

Wendy Shalit: 

I think what you're trying to do with the question is collapse the 

distinction between human touch and the significance of sex.  

And I think sex is different and just because you're giving 

someone a massage, I mean, there’s nothing wrong with that.  

But I think that sexuality is something different, and you can 

always come up with an extreme example to collapse that 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 56. 

 

 

 

distinction, but that just begs the question.   

John Donvan:  

Okay,  we are halfway through the direct head to head part of the 

debate.  I want to remind you I'm John Donvan, your moderator, 

and I want to now go to the other side of the table, Lionel Tiger, 

who argues against the motion, wants to pick up on that last 

point.   

Lionel Tiger: 

Well, first of all I, there’s a kind of a historical component to the 

other side.  There’s a famous syndrome in Turkey, rural Turkey, 

the Natasha.  The Natasha is a Russian woman who goes to a 

small town in Turkey and capsizes the entire system because 

she’s sexually available.  Now, the reason Natasha is there is 

because the men in Russia are drunk all the time, they have very 

low longevity, they are improper and not very useful husbands, 

the result is the birth rate in Russia, which is plummeting, it’s a 

major crisis actually.  But the reason for the Natashas comes out 

of a really poignant human story.  And I continue to feel that 

we’re losing not the nicety of the argument here, we’re losing the 

grandeur of the human issues that force some people into a 

small, intimate room, where they do something, and yes, it 

causes some people the distress that we’ve heard about.  None of 

us on this side applauds that.   At the same time, this is not 

exactly a trivial issue and I’m afraid it’s being reduced in its 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 57. 

 

 

 

importance into a sentimental kind of grab bag of victim 

complaints—   

John Donvan: 

Why sentimental.   

Lionel Tiger: 

Well…  [APPLAUSE]  Because it’s easy.  It’s all very—it’s easy in 

this country and everywhere else to talk about racial, class 

distinctions and so on.  Many of the clients of prostitutes I 

suspect, don’t have a great deal more money than the prostitutes, 

I don’t know.   Essentially what I’m trying to do here is, get the 

argument into the larger context of, of human sexuality, and 

away from a relatively, again sentimental concern.   There was 

just—if I may make one final comment on this, there was recently 

the publication and we’ve known in the primatology trade about 

it for years, that it turns out that chimp males who hunt, will give 

meat to women who—   

John Donvan:  

To women?   

Lionel Tiger:  

—will—if—a female—  [LAUGHTER]  Maybe.  To female chimps, 

and the—but the fascinating thing is it’s not just a quid pro quo.  

Because these become sustained and durable relationships, in 

which the male is a consort and an associate of the female, even 

when she’s not in estrus and therefore sexually available.   And 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 58. 

 

 

 

that is, it’s  kind of haunting.  Because it suggests that, this is 

actually a more elegant phenomenon than just giving meat to a 

female.   

John Donvan: 

Okay.   

Lionel Tiger: 

Uh—   

John Donvan:  

I see Wendy Shalit is quite anxious to come in on this.   

Wendy Shalit: 

I’m— I have to admit I’m—    

John Donvan:  

Wendy, can you just find your microphone—   

Wendy Shalit: 

Sure—   

John Donvan: 

Thanks.    

Wendy Shalit: 

Sorry.  I’m surprised by the negatives’ reliance on the argument 

that it’s not going away and historically, a lot of people have been 

doing it.  We’re not debating whether it’s common, to pay for sex, 

we’re not debating whether it’s happened, we’re arguing whether 

it’s right or wrong.  And, I think, I mean, if you bring up 

primatology, I’m just—I have to bring up, Mr. Tiger, your book 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 59. 

 

 

 

which I really enjoyed The Pursuit of Pleasure which was a 

pleasure to read…by the way, I must say.   I found one example 

really interesting, you mentioned female genital mutilation.  And 

you said what’s significant about female genital mutilation, is 

that men, males want sexual access to women, but they cannot 

bear it when other men have access to their mates.   A common 

solution to the problem is the double standard, of which female 

genital mutilation you say is the extreme representation.  Here 

the effort is to try to control both sex and reproduction at once, 

by imposing strict controls on the sexuality of women.  In an 

effort to prevent their wives’ impregnation by men other than 

themselves.   Now, I think we can always, you bring up chimps 

and primatology, we can explain yes female genital mutilation in 

terms of primatology but I hope we can all agree that that’s still 

wrong.  [PAUSE, APPLAUSE]  And, just because—   

John Donvan:  

Question from the right side—   

Wendy Shalit: 

—just because the chimps can provide an explanation doesn’t 

mean that it’s right.  [APPLAUSE]    

John Donvan:  

The questioner is over on the far right here.    

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER   

My question is for Mr. Cowen.  You made a distinction between 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 60. 

 

 

 

toddlers who are prostituted and adults who are prostituted.  

Sometimes, adults who are prostituted enter prostitution as 

toddlers or children.  So—   

John Donvan:  

Now, could you move the mic—   

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER   

Yeah.   

John Donvan: 

Thank you.    

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER   

My question to you is…a simple one.  Is it okay to buy a 20-year-

old woman, if that woman entered prostitution as a four-year-old, 

a 10-year-old, a 12-year-old.   

Tyler Cowen: 

Probably not.  There are plenty of cases, as I am more than 

willing to admit, where what goes on, is wrong.  But again, look 

at the resolution.  The key point is that there are diverse 

practices, and multiple worlds.  What you’re finding from the 

other side, is to take a woman in a difficult situation, choosing 

her best option.   I’m saying, blame the difficult situation.  

They’re saying, blame the best option.  It’s a very simple choice.  

Which one are you going to blame.  Again I say blame the difficult 

situation.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 61. 

 

 

 

John Donvan: 

Gentleman in the far left.  [APPLAUSE]    

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER  

Hello, good evening.  My name is [UNCLEAR], I’m a professor of 

psychology at the New School for Social Research and I have a 

question for the panel in favor of the motion.  When you were 

describing your prototypical prostitute, it came to mind for me, a 

prototypical coalmine worker.  Typically exploited for two or three 

generations, they had no other chance but going to the mines, 

and typically they suffer long-term mental and physical health 

consequences, [UNCLEAR] consequences for their employment.   

And I suspect that you would make a difference between this and 

you would argue that they’re two different cases.  And my—I 

suspect that your making difference on this would be based on 

disgust.  And as many a philosopher of law have argued, and I 

agree with basic—   

John Donvan:  

I need you to get— I think we see where you’re going but I need 

you to get to a question.    

MALE AUDIENCE MEMBER   

Yes, so the question is where it is on disgust that you make this, 

this difference, and I would argue that this would not be 

appropriate, as many philosophers have argued, we should not, 

legislate on the base of disgust.  [APPLAUSE]    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 62. 

 

 

 

Melissa Farley: 

We’re talking—  

John Donvan: 

Melissa Farley—   

Melissa Farley: 

—about the evidence of harm here, not a moral or emotional 

reaction.   And the evidence of harm, I think the other side has 

just conceded the debate, if it’s wrong to prostitute someone who 

was a child when they entered prostitution, then what we know, 

and there’s no argument about these numbers, is that in the 

vicinity of 75 to 85 or 90 percent of everyone in prostitution, 

entered prostitution as a legal minor, oftentimes, a 13- or 14-

year-old.  That’s a fact.  [APPLAUSE]    

John Donvan:  

Sydney Barrows.   

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

When she says that’s a fact, you—that may be a fact with respect 

to the people who have been interviewed, but you have to 

remember, that the people who are interviewed for this sort of 

thing [APPLAUSE], are a great minority, they are the ones that 

are in the most trouble, they’re the ones that end up, you know, 

being the most messed up.   And so they’re the ones that these 

people get to talk to and to interview, and I’m not debating that 

these people have horrible problems.  But to take a small 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 63. 

 

 

 

minority and to apply their problems to the majority, is just—

wrong.   

John Donvan: 

Catharine MacKinnon.   

Catharine MacKinnon: 

This research has been very carefully designed so that they really 

are a representative sample of people at all levels, at all stages, at 

all class divisions, positions, in the industry.  What’s being 

described by Ms. Barrows is research she doesn’t know.   And, 

it…  [APPLAUSE]  What—and the PTSD rates don’t vary according 

to class level, is the other thing to remember.  As to coalmine 

work and its negative consequences, what you describe is some 

people’s human rights are being violated through this work, 

that—in the way that it’s being done, in the coalmine industry.  

They have human rights and they need to be recognized.  What 

we’re talking about is people whose human rights are being 

violated, and they need to be addressed.   Now as it happens, 

whenever someone else is selling you for sex, you are trafficked, 

and your human rights are being violated.  The vast majority of 

people in the sex industry, somebody else is taking the pimp’s 

cut off their prostitution.   And they’re do—and this is what is 

being bought when you’re buying sex, this is the reality of it, it is 

an industry of human rights violation.  [APPLAUSE]   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 64. 

 

 

 

John Donvan: 

Question from the top, please.    

FEMALE AUDIENCE MEMBER   

We have criminal laws against child abuse, we have criminal laws 

against slavery, there are criminal laws that cover this kind of, of 

repression of human rights.  Now, as far as prostitution is 

concerned, if you take out the children that have been 

prostituted and the people who are held against their will, what 

you have is a contractual relationship.  And…I don’t see anything 

wrong with that.  [APPLAUSE]    

Catharine MacKinnon: 

Then what you have is at most 3 percent of the industry.  Is that 

what you’re defending?   

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

Yeah, but I don’t know where you get that—  Why would an 

upscale call girl even bother to be interviewed.  The people that 

you don’t hear from are the ones—what’s in it for them?   They 

have no problem with it, they’re not about to go and bitch and 

complain that they’re being, you know, abused, when they’re 

perfectly happy about it, you only hear from the unhappy people.   

Catharine MacKinnon: 

Well, I don’t think that’s—    

Melissa Farley: 

One of the things—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 65. 

 

 

 

John Donvan: 

Melissa Farley—   

Melissa Farley: 

One of the things—   

Catharine MacKinnon: 

—[UNCLEAR] research is done.    

Melissa Farley: 

One of the things—   

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

We don’t get to hear what your—   

John Donvan: 

Melissa—Melissa Farley.    

One of the things researchers have attempted to do is to increase 

the numbers of people we interview in indoor prostitution.  

Because it has been argued, and it has been my experience, that 

indoor prostitution and legal brothels and massage parlors and 

upscale call girl agencies, is often the—where the most harmed 

people are held, the most trafficked, the youngest.   And so, you 

can’t make that assumption.  Researchers, not myself, another 

person in San Francisco, and I’ve had this experience too, is that 

when we try to talk to pimps about interviewing their…“girls,” 

we’re denied permission to speak with them.  [APPLAUSE]    

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

I don’t think it—   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 66. 

 

 

 

John Donvan: 

Syd—Sydney, I’m, I’ve…you’re rolling your eyes and I’d like to put 

some words behind that.    

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

I just…this whole thing is just so absurd I wouldn’t even know 

where to start.  I mean…  [LAUGHS]  There is nothing in it for the 

girls who don’t have a problem with it to talk to these 

researchers, why would they bother.   

John Donvan: 

Wendy—   

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

You don’t even know how many of them are out there—   

Wendy Shalit: 

[UNCLEAR] they don’t have a problem.   

John Donvan: 

Wendy Shalit?   

Wendy Shalit: 

I don’t think it’s accurate to say that we haven’t heard from these 

high-end call girls, we have heard from them.  For example in 

your book, Ms. Barrows, you talked about Claudette, she’s the 

most empowered call girl, right, and she herself said this kind of 

work can be very taxing both physically and emotionally.   “I’ve 

never met a man who can really understand what it takes out of 

you.”  And I think that even the most supposedly empowered call 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 67. 

 

 

 

girls when they are interviewed, do say thing—  [LAUGHS]  say 

things like this—   

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

But see you took that in a negative way.   

Wendy Shalit: 

No, but—  [APPLAUSE]  I think that—   

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

Claudette loved—   

John Donvan:  

Ladies and gentlemen—   

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

—being a call girl—   

John Donvan: 

—ladies and gentlemen, that concludes Round 2 of our debate.  

[APPLAUSE]   So, we are now in the final stretch and soon you in 

our audience will be choosing the winner, and recall that at the 

start of the debate we asked you whether you took sides with or 

against the motion before us, which is, “It is wrong to pay for 

sex.”   Here are the results from your vote before the debate.  20 

percent of you were for the motion that it is wrong to pay for sex.  

50 percent were against, and, 30 percent were undecided, and we 

don’t have it on the graphic but I’ll share with you, that the for—

in the “for” category, it was 2 to 1, women to men.  In the 

“against” category, it was 3 to 2, men to women.   And undecided 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 68. 

 

 

 

was roughly equal.  So, we’re gonna go to closing statements 

now, that’s Round 3, and right after that, we will ask you to vote 

another time and remember we’re gonna end twice, once with the 

simple results and then, round of applause from all of you, and 

then we will share with you the breakdown by sex for those votes.  

[PAUSE]  So on to Round 3, closing statements by each of the 

debaters, speaking first against the motion, Lionel Tiger, 

anthropology professor at Rutgers University.   

[APPLAUSE]   

Lionel Tiger: 

You’re using my time.  Basically—I’ll have to repeat I’m afraid 

what I already said which is that, we have taken a subset of 

human behavior which we all disagree with and despise, which is 

coercive, which is as the speaker just before mentioned is covered 

by painfully wrought criminal law and so on, and we’ve turned 

that into a metaphor, and then a description of the common 

human experience that we all have of men and women or men 

and men or women and women together.   And somehow, in the 

description we lose the generosity of spirit, the sense of 

adventure, the intensity, and, let us not forget, and not 

mentioning primates again, but sex is about human evolution, 

it’s about reproduction, it’s the most important thing any species 

has to attend to.   And it would be a great surprise, if it were not 

confounded by glitches, sometimes tragic ones, it would be a 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 69. 

 

 

 

great surprise if everyone was in agreement about it.  We have, 

talking about prostitution, Indian girls are betrothed at the age of 

four to a guy who’s five and they are married, but they obviously 

can’t perform as married couples until they reach a certain age.   

The Kama Sutra, that famous book that nobody’s ever been able 

to succeed in emulating, was [LAUGHTER] given to the new 

couple when they finally were married so they could practice this 

great craft of sex.   I’m, all I want to protect here, is the notion 

that sex is not a disease, that sexual interaction is not 

necessarily an expletive, exploitative phenomenon, that it has its 

own legitimacy, its own agenda, and it will and has continued, in 

much the same way and a sensible society will try to make it 

better—   

John Donvan:  

Thank you—   

Lionel Tiger: 

—not to criminalize it—  

John Donvan: 

Thank you, Lionel Tiger.  [APPLAUSE]  I wanna point out that in 

our closing round, each debater is given a brief amount of time, 

two minutes each, to make a closing statement and a final appeal 

for your vote and now, summarizing her position for the motion, 

Wendy Shalit, author of The Good Girl Revolution:  Young Rebels 

with Self-Esteem and High Standards.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 70. 

 

 

 

[APPLAUSE]   

Wendy Shalit: 

Thank you, I certainly agree that sex is not a disease, so I’m glad 

we can [LAUGHS], perhaps all agree on that…  Look, nobody has 

addressed my point that, no one asks the ages of the girls, when 

they pay for sex, and that is the link between the trafficking of 

children, as well, and, so you wanna, I think, consider that, that’s 

something that nobody has addressed and it makes those paying 

for sex responsible.   Look, I think…since the 1960s, we’ve been 

beholden to this false dichotomy that, you know, you’re either a 

repressed person who has no feelings, or the prudes, or you’re 

the liberated who goes around with everyone, and treats sex 

casually and I don’t think this dichotomy really captures the 

experience of most women or most men for that matter.  And I 

think we need to revive the idea of higher standards for both 

sexes.  And, that sex is a good thing, but we don’t have to take 

advantage of the most vulnerable in our society when we choose 

our sexual partners.   The devaluing of women and children’s 

innocence that happens in a society that makes sex into a 

commodity, to validate that, and to declare that paying for sex is 

perfectly fine, is to say something about society’s relationship to 

women and especially girls that I think would be detrimental.   

But also to men.  You’ve—yes, we’ve all read that Times article 

about sugar daddies, but to me what was so touching was the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 71. 

 

 

 

man who went on the website, and he just gave the girl a monthly 

stipend for her education.  And he refused to have sex with her 

and this is what the debate is about, it’s about who we want to 

be.  And who knows the far-reaching consequences of that, that 

he went on this somewhat depressing website, but he was 

capable of such greatness and saying no, you know what, I’m not 

going to pay for sex.   And, if you think that what the man did 

didn’t matter, that he supported her education without even 

meeting her, and you think he could’ve just as easily paid for sex, 

and that would’ve been the same choice morally then vote for the 

negative team, but if you can see the beauty in that choice,  

which he made in the privacy of his own home, and not in any 

courtroom, then, vote for the proposition—  

John Donvan: 

Thank you—   

Wendy Shalit: 

—because we’re not a monkey, men are not monkeys and 

women—    

John Donvan:  

Thank you, Wendy Shalit—   

Wendy Shalit: 

—women are not chicken.  Thank you.   

John Donvan: 

Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  Summarizing against the motion, Tyler 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 72. 

 

 

 

Cowen, economics professor at George Mason University.   

Tyler Cowen: 

Rather than repeat my major points, I’d like to focus on one small 

answer.  The issue came up, what if a man is a quadriplegic, and 

wants to buy sex.  The opposition still hasn’t answered this 

question, in my opinion, their responses were, to put it bluntly, 

lame.  [LAUGHTER]   Women will come around, let’s teach 

women disability should not be a problem, that’s fine, no one will 

disagree with that.  But what about, dot, dot, dot.  There simply 

was no answer.  The other side would’ve been much better simply 

saying look, that’s an exception to the principle, in that case it’s 

fine.   But they cannot bring themselves to give that humane 

answer.  I think when push comes to shove, there’s something 

about the notion of informed, consenting adults, which is what’s 

at stake here…making an exchange that they simply do not like.   

If you’re in any doubt, just consider different parts of the world, 

and where they would line up in this debate.  The notion that 

there are real abuses, but that buying sex is something that we 

should tolerate, is extremely common in western Europe.   The 

kinds of arguments you’re hearing on the other side.  If you look 

at the debates over prostitution in the country of Iran, you hear 

exactly, and I mean exactly the same arguments in Iran, that you 

have heard from the people on the other side of this debate.   If 

you look at what some aspects of what the religious right push 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 73. 

 

 

 

for, the arguments they make, it is very similar to what you have 

heard on the other side of this debate.  [APPLAUSE]  If you’re in 

any doubt, ask yourself, in which set of societies with which set 

of attitudes would you rather live.   Western Europe, or the kinds 

of places and cultures, where the attitude toward prostitution is 

that which you find to my right.  Think about that, and then 

please vote accordingly.  Thank you.    

John Donvan:  

Thank you, Tyler Cowen.  [APPLAUSE]  Summarizing her position 

for the motion, “It is wrong to pay for sex,” Melissa Farley, a 

psychologist and Prostitution Research and Education.   

Melissa Farley: 

I think it’s wrong to pay for sex, there’s no mutuality of sexual 

pleasure or any other kind of power in prostitution, where one 

person has the social, legal, and economic power to buy another 

person, and to use them as a sexualized puppet.   By the way one 

of the kinds of damages we haven’t talked about today, is the 

damage to women’s sexuality after being in prostitution for a long 

time.  They usually are not capable of any kind of sexual 

intimacy, that reflects the years of selling that act in prostitution.   

They say, that’s stolen from them.  Men who are sold in 

prostitution experience exactly the same kinds of damage to their 

sexuality, and the similar symptoms of traumatic stress.  Maybe 

the primates we should take a lesson from, are the bonobos, who, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 74. 

 

 

 

when female bonobos are co-dominant, males are less aggressive 

and females are more sexual.  There’s a lot of sexuality in bonobo 

society, everyone’s having sex.  But it’s used for mutual pleasure, 

it’s used to cement social bonds.  And by the way the first time a 

male—adolescent male gets sexually aggressive, the female elder 

bonobos get together and kick his ass.  He—  [LAUGHTER, 

APPLAUSE]  He learns from that one experience that that’s not 

what sex is.   So, one other comment about legalization of 

prostitution, it really is a failed experiment, the same numbers of 

women in legal prostitution in Nevada want to escape it, the same 

numbers are homeless, as in other kinds of prostitution.   The 

institution of prostitution is built on the exploitation and abuse of 

women, it can’t be fixed, only abolished.  I’m relentlessly 

optimistic about men’s capacity for change.  It’s wrong to buy 

sex.   

[APPLAUSE]   

John Donvan:  

Thank you, Melissa Farley.  Summarizing her position against 

the motion, the Mayflower Madame, Sydney Biddle Barrows.    

Sydney Biddle Barrows: 

Well, people have tried to legislate human nature and morality for 

centuries, and it’s never worked.  It’d be great if it did, but it 

doesn’t.  So we have to get real.  Now, it is true that, it’s…when it 

comes to the younger girls, I think it’s tragic and I don’t 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 75. 

 

 

 

understand why we are not absolutely prosecuting to the fullest 

extent of the law, men who want to have sex with a young girl—I 

mean I’m talking really young girls and children.   [Decent men 

don’t want to do that.  And, I think to… as I said before to paint 

everyone with the same tar brush, is not right.  Because, there 

are a lot of men who pay for sex because they feel— and I—oh, 

I’m gonna hear the hisses on this one—that it’s being respectful.  

Now what is more disrespectful or respectful.   A man’s in a bar, 

he pours 30, 40 dollars’ worth drinks down a girl’s throat, says 

oh, you know, I’m really feeling something for you.  There could 

really be something here.  Why don’t you come up and see my 

etchings.  [LAUGHTER]   So she goes up, she sees his etchings, 

and he has his way with her ‘cause she’s so drunk that she can’t 

practically say no, and then oh yes, oh sure, I’ll call you 

tomorrow, he never does…she’s just been used.   But a guy who 

thinks that a woman is worth it, he calls up and he says, I think 

that it’s worth $500 an hour, for me to pay to have sex with you, I 

think you’re worth it, I wanna give it to you, I don’t wanna pour 

$40 worth of drinks down your throat and steal it from you.   I 

wanna give it to you.  And so, I don’t think that there’s 

anything—I mean, you have a lot of very honest men out there, 

who pay for it because they feel it’s being more respectful.  Not 

for children, not for trafficked women, but there are huge 

amounts of men out there who pay for it because they believe it’s 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 76. 

 

 

 

the right thing do, that it’s a fair exchange, and they want and 

they choose to do it, and we should—the women should be 

allowed to take the money.  Why not.    

John Donvan:  

Thank you, Sydney Barrows.  [APPLAUSE]  And our final speaker 

tonight, summarizing her position for the motion, “It is wrong to 

pay for sex,” Catharine MacKinnon, professor of law at the 

University of Michigan.   

[APPLAUSE]   

Catharine MacKinnon: 

Thanks.  From the other side we’ve heard that paying for sex is 

old.  That it’s diverse.  That it’s natural.  Although I don’t think 

there are any pimps among chimps.  That…  [LAUGHTER]  that 

there’s a global grandeur to human sexuality.  And, also I think 

in essence that there’s nothing wrong with it if you get paid for it 

but you aren’t the one that has to do it.   But we haven’t heard an 

argument about why it’s right.  And little bit about why some 

aspects of it might not be wrong, entirely.  But nobody’s really 

saying why it’s right.  And to be on the cash nexus, with sex.   

When this gets, you know, pushed down to the fine edges of the 

slippery slope we essentially are having a, you know, if they get 

their way, what can we still have, department.  And UNESCO, 

which is a United Nations entity, has this to say about the 

relation of what we’ve been talking about, sexual victimization, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 77. 

 

 

 

and the economic exchange, they say, “Sexual victimization”—

this is a quote— “has been found to be the first step in the 

breakdown of a woman’s identity, which is necessary, to render 

the human body into a sexual commodity for economic 

exchange.”    

 

That’s I think what it is.  It’s not only about—what that’s saying 

is, I think, is that what’s right about sex, is what paying for it 

violates.  The hard issue I think for our side is, what to do when 

women aren’t paid for anything else.  I’ve recently been working 

with 13-year-old girls who are the sole support of their families, 

an inter-generational caste-based prostitution in India.  And they 

are the ones who are saying, not…how can you take this one and 

only thing away from us that is the only thing that anyone will 

buy.   They are the ones who are saying, give us any real option.  

This—our economic desperation that has put us in this position, 

is not all our lives can be.  And, they’re saying, in Mr. Cowen’s 

terms, change the difficult situation.   Now, the other thing that is 

not being addressed by the other side is the question, why aren’t 

men being sold for sex.  Like by the millions worldwide in the 

same ways and in the same proportions women are, it seems me, 

that if being bought and sold for sex is part of the grandeur of 

human sexuality that men are really missing out on something 

here.  [LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]    



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 78. 

 

 

 

John Donvan:  

Thank you, Catharine MacKinnon.   

Catharine MacKinnon: 

So…   

John Donvan: 

And that concludes Round 3—   

Catharine MacKinnon: 

Women vote—women vote 1—    

John Donvan:  

Clo—closing statements—   

Catharine MacKinnon: 

—men vote 4.  Okay?    

John Donvan:  

And it is now time for you to pick the winner, the motion before 

us once again is…it is wrong to pay for sex.  And if you turn to 

your keypads…keys number 1, 2, and 3, are for females in the 

audience, 4, 5 and 6 are for males.  All the other numbers are for 

the bonobos.  [LAUGHTER]  And we’ll give you about 30 seconds 

to lock that in.   

Melissa Farley: 

Is it bone-a-bos or bon-a-bos.    

John Donvan:  

Bon-a-bos—?   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 79. 

 

 

 

Melissa Farley: 

Bonobos, [INAUDIBLE].   

John Donvan:  

Does anybody need more time?  Okay, recall, in about three or 

four minutes we’ll have the results tabulated and we are going to 

announce them two different ways.  And please, when I raise my 

arm like that, some applause would be appreciated.   So, while 

the votes are being tabulated I wanna talk with you, first of all 

thank your debaters for a very, very spirited evening.  

[APPLAUSE]  And I also wanna thank everyone in the audience 

who asked a question and everyone—all of you were—you could 

feel it from the stage here, you were on the edge of your seats, 

you were very alive and present in this debate and it just really 

added to the energy, so to you as well.  [APPLAUSE]   

 

Now the final debate of our season will be Tuesday, May 12th, the 

motion is, “Diplomacy with Iran is going nowhere.”  Panelists for 

the motion are Liz Cheney, the daughter of Vice-President Dick 

Cheney and a former State Department official, who oversaw 

Middle East policy during the George W. Bush administration.  

Her partner will be Dan Senor who recently co-founded the think 

tank Foreign Policy Initiative Bill Kristol.  He is married to CNN’s 

Campbell Brown.   Against the motion, Nicholas Burns, 

ambassador who served across five Presidential administrations 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 80. 

 

 

 

over 27 years and was the highest-ranking diplomat at the US 

Department of State until his retirement last year,  his partner 

will be Kenneth Pollack, a former CIA intelligence analyst and 

expert on Middle East politics, and son-in-law of my former boss 

Ted Koppel.   

 

This debate will take place here once again at Rockefeller 

University’s Caspary Auditorium.  In May we will also be 

announcing the motions for our upcoming fall 2009 season of five 

debates, so next month, we’ll have a clear look at what next year 

looks like for us.   Tickets will then become available through our 

website.  We know the dates will be September 15th, October 6th, 

October 27th, November 17th and December 8th.  Scheduled to 

participate so far, across a range of topics, are Vanity Fair 

columnist and founder of news aggregator Newser.com, Michael 

Wolff, that will be on the death of the mainstream media…  

Congressman Asa Hutchison, the former head of the US Drug 

Enforcement Agency and Mexico’s former Foreign Minister Jorge 

Castañeda on Mexico’s drug wars.  Eliot Spitzer on the economy.  

And former US trade representative, Ambassador Susan Schwab 

on buying American.   

 

All of our debates as we’ve said before can be heard on more than 

185 NPR stations across the country, you will hear yourselves, if 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 81. 

 

 

 

you tune in.  Please check your local NPR member station listings 

for the dates and times of broadcast, also copies of books by our 

panelists tonight as well as past debate DVD’s are on sale in the 

lobby, and are the results coming down?  The wave-off means, 

keep talking.  [LAUGHTER, PAUSE]  Here they come.  [PAUSE]  

So I’ll do this twice.  [PAUSE]   Okay.  So you voted before the 

debate on whether you agree or disagree with the motion, “It is 

wrong to pay for sex,” you have just now voted again, and here 

we go, before the debate, 20 percent of you were for the motion, 

50 percent were against the motion, and 30 percent were 

undecided.   After the debate, 45 percent of you are for the 

motion, 46 percent are against, and 9 percent are undecided, the 

side for the motion wins…  [APPLAUSE]  Congratulations to all of 

them and of course, to the art of persuasion itself, for me, John 

Donvan, and intelligence Squared, thank you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

John Donvan:  

And now I’ll share with you how it broke down by sex of the 

voters.  [PAUSE]  In the after-debate vote of 45 percent for the 

motion…58 percent are women, and 27 percent are men.  

[PAUSE, OVERLAPPING VOICES]  Well, there’s an undecided as 

well.  Undecided I have as 7.   Are we gonna put a slide up ‘cause 

this’ll—  All right, let me just read the numbers to you, it’s a lot of 

numbers.  Women in the audience before the debate, I’ll read it to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 

 “It’s Wrong to Pay for Sex” (4/21/09) Page 82. 

 

 

 

you this way, before the debate, women in the audience voted 25 

percent for the motion, after the debate, they voted 58 percent for 

the motion.   

 

Women in the audience before the debate voted 41 percent 

against the motion, and after the debate, 34 percent against the 

motion.  In the undecided category, women.  Before the debate, 

34 percent of women here were undecided, 8 percent were 

undecided at the end.   Now looking at men.  Before the 

debate…13 percent of men were for the motion, after the debate, 

27 percent of men were for the motion.  [APPLAUSE]  Against the 

motion, men.  Before the debate, 61 percent were against the 

motion, after the debate, 66 percent…  [LAUGHTER]  were 

against the motion.   And the undecided category, men, before 

the debate, 26 percent were undecided, after the debate, 7 

percent were undecided.  Thank you for your patience, for the 

calculators in your heads, for our debaters, thank you very much 

for this evening.   

[APPLAUSE]  

 

END  


