
 
MEDIA TRANSCRIPTS, INC. 

41 WEST 83rd STREET  NEW YORK, N.Y.  10024   (212)  362-1481 

 

FOR The Rosenkranz Foundation/ 
Intelligence Squared US 

 

DATE 10/09/07 

LET’S STOP WELCOMING UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS 
Moderator:                 John Hockenberry 

For the motion:         Vernon Briggs, Mark Krikorian, Heather Mac Donald 

Against the motion:  Daniel Griswold, Enrique Morones,  Karen Narasaki 

 . 

 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY  

Welcome.  As is often the case, uh, in New York on evenings of 

public discourse, the event begins with a bad joke.  But I’m going 

to begin this event with a dangerous joke that I overheard on a 

reporting assignment that I did out in California very recently.  

And I was in the company of some, of a very diverse group of very 

successful business people who were sitting around in California 

talking about issues of the day.  And one just was dying to tell 

the following joke, which I will repeat.  It’s not one that I would 

necessarily tell except in the context of this debate and what 

we’re going to be discussing tonight.  It seems at the Alamo – you 

know the Alamo – at the conclusion of the defeat of the defenders 

of that fort in Texas, Jim Bowie – who was one of the defenders – 

and one of his colleagues looked out the window and saw in the 

grounds of the fort the victorious Mexicans swarming in.  And 

Bowie turned to his colleague and said, Are we pouring concrete 

today?  [LAUGHTER]  The laughter catches in your throat.  And 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 2. 

 

 

 

that joke and its relevance, its humor, its whatever that sort of 

hit on that day was very, very meaningful to me.   

 

Because it really sort of depicted for me, in a visceral kind of way, 

just how electrifying the immigration debate is, is in America 

right now.  Um, on the eve of an election year, we see an issue in 

which American culture, American race, American economics, 

America’s sense of its own notion of freedom, inclusion and what 

we are as a nation, the actual definition of what it means to be 

American is all tied up in this thorny knot called the immigration 

debate.  Um, and so it is in that context that I offer that very bad 

and dangerous joke tonight, um, to set the stage for what we 

hope will be a very, very lively event.  Some of you have come to 

these before, um, and know the rules of the road.  Others I will, 

um, like to lay out some of the details for all of you.  Now, you 

know, we like audience participation.  We like the fact that this is 

done before a live audience.   

 

You’ll notice this is a radio show here, microphones all over 

onstage, microphones all over on the side.  Um, fill in the empty 

seats.  Move forward.  Kind of, you know, get, get collegial.  Um, 

and, uh, of course, as is always the case, turn off your cell 

phones and beepers.  We kinda like the sound track we have for 

our program here.  We don’t necessarily need an addition from 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 3. 

 

 

 

one of your electronic devices.  Um, we, of course, want questions 

from you.  You have cards, I believe.  Does everyone see their 

cards that they have at their seat?  Um, we’re going to try 

something a little different on the questions this, this time 

around.  We have pencils and let me just make sure that I get 

this right.  Now, if you have a question fill out your card.  Write 

the question.  And unlike other debates, we’re going to do it a 

little bit differently.  At the top either put your name, if you’re 

comfortable having me read your name or some way of identifying 

you.  

 

But I’m really, if it’s really hard to identify you I’m probably not 

going to use your question.  So if you want your question used, 

even if you don’t want your name used, put Donald Duck at the 

top or something, just so I can at least say whoever said they’re 

Donald Duck, it’s your question.  Cause I’m not going to waste a 

lot of time going, the person who says that they’re wearing the 

green shirt in the fourth row.  I’m not going to do that, okay?  If 

you want your question answered a name or your name.  Um, the 

ushers will collect your cards and they’ll give you a new card so 

you can ask as many questions as you like.  Um, that is it.  But 

obviously, we want something lively and wonderful and 

interesting.  And, you know, the bar is high here because the 

debates that, uh, you have very previously attended have been 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 4. 

 

 

 

very, very successful.  I’m thrilled to be here.  I am John 

Hockenberry.  I, uh, previously you may know my name from, 

uh, National Public Radio.  You may know it from, uh, NBC 

television.  Um, I would like to introduce our sponsor and sort of 

uber host for this, uh, entire series – uh, Robert Rosenkranz, who 

is Chairman of the Rosenkranz Foundation [APPLAUSE] and of 

course the sponsor of this evening’s debate.   

ROBERT ROSENKRANZ 

Well, thank you very much, John.  Uh, Dana Wolfe, our 

Executive Producer, and I are very pleased to welcome you to 

tonight’s Intelligence Squared debate.  Immigration will almost 

certainly be a major issue in the next Presidential election.  It’s 

front page news when Governor Spitzer wants to issue driver’s 

licenses to illegal, uh, immigrants because these are our de facto 

identity cards.  The very term illegal is emotionally charged – so 

much so that, uh, some of our panelists insisted on the word 

undocumented in our resolution.  And yet the division and 

viewpoint does not fall along conventional liberal/conservative 

lines.  In, in classical economics labor mobility benefits both the 

worker and his employer.   

 

And the gains seem obvious, just by a casual glance at our daily 

lives.  Consider the growing number of immigrant laborers, many 

from Mexico and Central America, who have taken up 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 5. 

 

 

 

housekeeping jobs, gardening, childcare jobs throughout the New 

York Metropolitan area in recent years.  And then consider the 

large number of immigrant Ph.D. candidates, many of them Asian 

and Indian, who study science, engineering, mathematics and go 

on to key roles in our technology firms.  At both ends of the 

economic spectrum, both the immigrants and those who employ 

them are better off.  Surely this enhances our economic 

dynamism and global competitiveness.  On the other hand, these 

benefits may come with associated costs, particularly for the 

unskilled migrants.   

 

Who bears the cost of their emergency medical care, of educating 

their children, of dealing with increased criminality and social 

unrest?  And isn’t the term undocumented just a euphemism for 

illegal?  And shouldn’t illegality be punished rather than 

rewarded?  In a post-9/11 world don’t we need special vigilance 

about who crosses our borders?  Well, emotions notwithstanding, 

there are good arguments on both sides and a lot to learn from 

our outstanding panel.  Our moderator is John Hockenberry.  He 

is an author, columnist, veteran broadcast news correspondent 

and teller of very bad jokes.  [LAUGHTER]  He holds an array of 

astonishing, an astonishing a…array of awards or an array of 

astonishing awards and is the host of a new morning news 

program on WNYC, which is going to be starting early next year.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 6. 

 

 

 

John, the evening is yours.   

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Thank you, Robert.  [APPLAUSE]  I’d like to welcome you all to 

the second debate of the second Intelligence Squared U.S. series.  

I want to give you a brief rundown of how the evening is going to 

go.  First, the proposer of the motion – and let me remind you 

what the motion is.  The motion for tonight is:  Let’s Stop 

Welcoming Undocumented Immigrants.  The motion tonight is:  

Let’s Stop Welcoming Undocumented Immigrants.  So, first, the 

proposer of the motion will start by presenting their side of the 

argument.  The opposition will follow.  Each person will get a 

maximum of eight minutes and we will go back and forth from 

one side to the other.  Second, when all six speakers are finished 

with their opening remarks I will open up the floor to brief 

questions from the audience, questions that I may have, 

questions that are motivated by our panelists who may want to 

address each other directly.  Third, when the question and 

answer is complete, each debater will make a final statement, 

lasting not more than two minutes per person.   

 

And fourth, after the final closing statement is made you will vote 

on tonight’s motion with the key pad attached to the armrest at 

your seat.  It looks like this.  Look down, you all have one.  And 

fifth, and last, I will announce the results of the audience vote 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 7. 

 

 

 

and tell you which side carried the day.  Beforehand, from our 

panelists let’s start with a pre-debate vote.  Let’s do a little base 

line data here.  Pick up the key pad attached to your armrest on 

the left.  Remember this little guy here.  For audience members 

sitting along the aisle to my right, your key pad is attached to the 

arm rest on your right side next to your neighbor’s.  Does 

everyone have a key pad?  All right, when I prompt you, you will 

press one to vote for the motion, two to vote against the motion or 

three if you are undecided.   

 

Let’s Stop Welcoming Undocumented Immigrants – are you for, 

are you against or are you undecided?  You may begin voting 

now.  [PAUSE]  All right.  You seem very, very methodical and 

definitive there.  Hmm, I’m very anxious to know the results.  

And I will reveal the results of your vote a little later in the 

evening.  I will now introduce the panel.  Please hold your 

applause until all six are introduced.  We are thrilled to have all 

six of these people with us.  Professor at the School of Industrial 

and Labor Relations at Cornell University, Vernon M. Briggs, Jr. 

is the, is speaking for the motion.  Executive Director of the 

Center for Immigration Studies and Contributor to the National 

Review, Mark Krikorian, is also speaking for the motion.   And 

the John M. Olin Fellow at the Manhattan Institute and 

contributing Editor to City Journal, Heather Mac Donald, is also 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 8. 

 

 

 

speaking for the motion.   

 

Against the motion, Director of the Cato Institute Center for 

Trade Policy Studies, Daniel T. Griswold.  Speaking against the 

motion, President and Founder of Border Angels, human rights 

activist, Enrique Morones.  And also speaking against the motion, 

President and Executive Director of the Asian-American Justice 

Center, Karen K. Narasaki.  All right, let’s begin.  [APPLAUSE]   

As you recall, each speaker will have eight minutes.  Beginning 

tonight, speaking for the motion, Heather Mac Donald.   

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

Thank you very much, John.  Two principles require that we stop 

welcoming undocumented immigrants, otherwise known as illegal 

aliens – respect for the rule of law and respect for facts on the 

ground.   The ongoing violation of our immigration laws has 

reversed the traditional roles in a sovereign nation.  It is now 

people living outside our border who determine our immigration 

policy, not Americans.  The facts that result from this constant 

violation are these:  a significant portion of the children of illegal 

Mexicans and Central Americans are adopting an underclass 

culture, as anyone can verify for himself by looking at social 

statistics or spending time in heavily Hispanic schools.  Until we 

figure out how to prevent this from happening our unrestricted 

immigration flows guarantee social problems for years into the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 9. 

 

 

 

future.  Now, on paper, our elected representatives continue to 

make our immigration rules.  In reality, however, the power to 

determine who comes into the country and on what conditions, 

the most basic attribute of sovereignty, has passed from 

Congress to the world at large.  A net half million aliens enter the 

country illegally each year.  Once inside, they have enjoyed 

virtual immunity from any risk of penalties, as well as receiving a 

host of taxpayer benefits.   

 

Such immunity is now considered an entitlement.  Any hint of 

enforcement, no matter how limited, inevitably provokes a 

massive outcry from immigrant advocates and immigrants 

themselves, that the government is behaving unfairly and, 

indeed, unlawfully.  Disapproving headlines will blare from 

newspapers across the country.  Quote:  Fear among immigrants 

spreads, unquote.  Mexican Consul Generals will complain 

bitterly that the government is psychologically abusing their 

countrymen by causing them to worry about their status.  It 

seems that not only ill…do illegal aliens have the right to live here 

without being deported, they also have the right to live without 

thinking that they face even a minimum risk of being deported.  

This sense of entitlement does a great injustice to the thousands 

of law-abiding foreigners who are patiently waiting to enter the 

country legally.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 10. 

 

 

 

 

And it makes a mockery of our laws.  I would like to ask our 

esteemed opposing team if they think that anyone should ever be 

deported for coming into the country illegally or whether they 

believe that once across the border he should be home free.  Now, 

you may hear from Mr. Griswold tonight that our immigration 

laws are economically unwise.  I and my colleagues vehemently 

disagree.  But even if it were the case that controlling the border 

was bad economic policy, the sanctity of the law does not rest on 

whether it meets someone’s idea of optimal economic efficiency.  

Until the American people decide to change the law it should be 

respected and enforced.  You may also hear tonight that we have 

tried immigration enforcement and that it has failed and 

therefore that we have no choice other than to allow the present 

inflood to continue.   

 

In fact, until a few months ago, there has been almost no 

immigration enforcement in the interior of the country.  In 2004 a 

mere three firms were issued fine notices for employing illegal 

aliens out of the hundreds of thousands of such law-breaking 

employers across the country.  To be sure, the country has 

progressively put more agents on the border.  But once an illegal 

alien got across the border he entered a three million square mile 

sanctuary zone.  This means that mass deportation is not 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 11. 

 

 

 

required to revive the effectiveness of our immigration laws.  The 

illegal population has burgeoned precisely because illegals 

assume they face absolutely no risk of enforcement, as the 

complaints about psychologically harassing illegal aliens with de 

minimis enforcement show.  Increase that risk even slightly and 

calculations change.  After 9/11, the Department of Homeland 

Security deported fifteen hundred illegal Pakistanis living in, in 

New York, leading fifteen thousand more to leave on their own.   

 

A modest increase in enforcement would result in a similar 

reduction over time of the broader illegal alien population.  The 

second principle supporting tonight’s motion is respect for facts 

on the ground.  Those facts show that unrestrained illegal 

immigration is producing an underclass culture among many 

children of Hispanic illegal aliens.  Talk to students in any heavily 

Latino school and you’ll hear something like this – told to me by 

an undocumented Guatemalan girl in Los Angeles – Quote:  

"Most of the students I hung out with when I started school have 

dropped out.  Others got kicked out or got into drugs.  Five 

graduated and four homegirls got pregnant."  This testimony is 

perfectly representative.  Hispanics now have the highest teen 

pregnancy rate in the country.  Moreover, fifty percent of 

Hispanic children are born out of wedlock, a rate two times that 

of whites and three times that of Asians.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 12. 

 

 

 

 

The stigma against unmarried child-rearing among teens has 

virtually disappeared.  Hispanics have the highest school dropout 

rate in the country – fifty percent.  And gang life is sucking in 

large numbers of Latino youth.  The incarceration rate of 

Mexican-Americans jumps eightfold between the first and second 

generation, resulting in an incarceration rate three and a half 

times that of whites.  Gang counselors in schools from 

Washington, D.C. to San Diego –  

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

 [OVERLAP]  One.  

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

 …despair at the fact that younger and younger kids are joining 

gangs.  To be sure, most Hispanic immigrants are industrious 

strivers who seize every opportunity available to them.  But as 

long as many of the children are assimilating into the underclass 

and adopting its values, maintaining the current high levels of 

illegal entry will bring in its wake rising welfare and crime.  In 

conclusion, we should continue to welcome legal immigrants who 

have respected American law from the moment they entered the 

country and in the way they entered it.  But it is an insult to 

them to accord the same privileges to so-called undocumented 

immigrants who have chosen to flout the law.  And it is not in the 

country’s self-interest to do so.  Thank you very much.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 13. 

 

 

 

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

[OVERLAP]  Thank you, Heather Mac Donald, speaking for the 

resolution.  Now, to speak against the resolution, Daniel 

Griswold.   

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

Well, thank you, everybody, for coming out tonight.  Uh, first I 

want to lodge a protest at the, uh, proposition that we’re 

debating.  It’s a little bit like, uh, Have you stopped beating your 

wife?, kind of question.  I don’t think anybody up here is thrilled 

about having illegal immigrants in the United States.  Our side 

would like to see them able to come legally.  And I’d like you to 

think of the motion as, uh, Let’s Stop Welcoming More Legal 

Immigration.  And I’d urge you to vote against it.  Immigrants 

have made the United States a prosperous, dynamic and free 

country.  They have throughout our history, they continue to do 

so today – both on the higher end of the skills spectrum – but I 

will argue tonight that low-skilled immigrants are also benefiting 

the United States.  There are two powerful economic and 

demographic trends, two very positive ones, that are driving low-

skilled immigration to the United States.  On the demand side, 

our economy continues to create hundreds of thousands of net 

new jobs every year for low-skilled workers in fields like retail, 

cleaning, landscaping, food preparation.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 14. 

 

 

 

 

And at the same time, the supply of Americans who traditionally 

filled these jobs – Americans without a high school diploma – has 

been dropping steadily.  We’re getting older, we’re getting better 

educated.  Uh, less than ten percent of Americans, adult 

Americans, do not have a high school diploma, compared to fifty 

percent in the early 1960s.  4.6 million fewer Americans are in 

the work force without a high school diploma today than just a 

decade ago.  So we have a, a structural mismatch between 

demand and supply in our economy.  And yet there’s no legal 

channel for a peaceful, hardworking twenty-four year old Mexican 

or Central American to come into the United States legally and fill 

these jobs that there are simply not enough Americans, uh, there 

to fill.  And yes, we have tried enforcement and it’s failed.  We 

have ramped up real spending on enforcement six-fold in the last 

two decades, line watch hours at the border eight-fold.  We’ve 

built walls for miles into the desert.   

 

We have gone through periods of increased interior enforcement 

in the late Nineties and now again.  It has made no dent.  

Enforcement without reform is doomed to fail.  It has failed in the 

past and it continues to fail.  You know, we rounded up a few 

thousand, uh, workers at a chicken processing plant, uh, in 

Georgia a while back.  You know, two thousand down, eight 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 15. 

 

 

 

million to go.  It’s a futile exercise.  There have been perverse 

consequences.  Because of our enforcement those trying to get in 

are actually, uh, more successful because they’re going through 

more remote regions in the desert.  It’s more dangerous.  The 

death rate has tripled.  Three or four hundred people are dying 

every year for the crime of wanting a better job and trying to 

cross the border.  And here’s the irony:  once they’re in they’re 

more likely to stay.  Because of the expense and risk of crossing 

the border once they’re in they tend to stay.   

 

Traditionally we’ve had a strong circular component to Mexican 

migration.  Eighty percent of them who came here eventually 

went back home, uh, as temporary immigrants.  And we’ve 

interrupted that now and I think a legalization program would 

restore that circular flow.  The only answer is immigration reform.  

We need to change the law.  This is a broken, dysfunctional law.  

We need to change the law.  You know, uh, and I think we need 

to both create a temporary worker program and legalize those 

who are here.  We’re not talking amnesty.  They would pay a fine, 

they would serve probation.  That’s the penalty for a 

misdemeanor.  It’s not a felony.  It’s not a crime to be here.  It’s a 

civil infraction.  The punishment should fit the crime.  The 

Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, of course, did, did 

none of that.  Uh, but the missing piece was that it had no 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 16. 

 

 

 

temporary worker program, no provision for legalizing future 

workers, and it failed.   

 

Let’s not make that mistake again.  Back in the 1950s we had a 

problem with illegal immigration.  We had the Bracero Program 

but the Visas were insufficient.  We dramatically increased the 

Visas and illegal immigration dropped by ninety-five percent.   

[00:23:13:04]  Our side’s not talking about letting in more 

immigrants.  We’re talking about turning in a flow of illegal and a 

population of illegal immigrants into a legal flow and population 

of i…of immigrants.  You’ll hear the argument from the other side 

that this is bad for low-skilled Americans.   Well, if you’re twenty-

five years old and you don’t have a high school diploma you’re 

getting it from all sides.  The best thing you can do is stay in 

school.  You’ll get a thirty-eight percent raise just over somebody 

who’s dropped out.  So it’s, the answer isn’t to build walls.  It’s to 

encourage people to stay in school.   

 

You’ll hear about the fiscal and social costs and you’ve already 

heard that.  Uh, I just don’t see it.  Yes, low-skilled workers tend 

to consume more in government services than they pay in taxes, 

but I think the other side exaggerates those costs.  The costs are 

manageable.  We can control access to the welfare state.  And 

they’re overwhelmed by the economic benefits to having a more, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 17. 

 

 

 

uh, expansive, uh, dynamic economy.   The social costs:  You 

know, Heather talked about this swelling underclass.  I just don’t 

see it.  In the last decade the poverty rate is down in the United 

States.  Cri…crime is down by a third from the early 1990s – and 

this is with a doubling of the illegal immigrant population. The 

number of U.S. households headed by somebody without a high 

school diploma has dropped by more than ten percent, uh, in the 

last decade.   

 

So we have a shrinking underclass, uh, in this country and 

immigrants are helping to create, uh, opportunities throughout 

our economy.  The answer, my friends, is to fence off the welfare 

state, not to fence off our country.   Let me end by talking a little 

bit about national security.  And I don’t need to remind people in 

New York how important that is.  None of us want to see a repeat 

of September 11th.  I think a sensible immigration reform 

program would enhance our security and bring order to the 

border.  This is a very important thing.  We would begin to drain 

the swamp of smuggling and document fraud that can facilitate, 

uh, terrorism.  We’d encourage people to come forward, 

announce themselves to authorities, to cooperate, uh, with the 

police rather than living in the shadows and being afraid.   

 

And also we would free up resources to go after the real criminals 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 18. 

 

 

 

and terrorists.  Uh, I think that’s one reason why our Homeland, 

uh, Security boss, uh, Michael Chertoff, has been such a strong 

supporter of immigration reform.  It would make his job easier.  

As he told Congress recently, uh, Immigration reform would, 

quote, "dramatically reduce the pressure on our borders, aid our 

economy and ease the task of our law enforcement agents inside 

the country."  What in the world is our Homeland Security 

Department doing using its scarce resources going after janitors 

and dishwashers and meat packers when it should be going after 

criminals and terrorists?  We need to stop wasting our dollars, 

manpower and lives in a futile effort to close our borders and 

turn away hardworking, peaceful immigrants.  We need to change 

the law –  

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

[OVERLAP]  One.   

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

 …so that our country can welcome more legal immigrants to 

help us grow.  And let me just end with a world about the rule of 

law.  I’m all for enforcing the law.  I’m all for obeying the law.  But 

the law must be reasonable.  It must be consistent with how 

normal people live their lives.  In the 1930s we had alcohol 

prohibition.  It made criminals out of millions of people who just 

wanted a drink after dinner.  The American frontier was settled 

by illegal squatters and instead of clearing them off we passed the 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 19. 

 

 

 

Homestead Act.  Uh, we need to change the law so that our 

immigration law better reflects our needs as an economy, our 

need for a more secure nation and our highest values.  Thank 

you very much.  [APPLAUSE]   

JOHN HOCKENBERRY  

 [OVERLAP]  Thank you.  Daniel Griswold, speaking against the 

resolution.  I want to remind the audience if you have a question 

don’t wait.  Jot it down on your card, pass it to the ushers on the 

aisles and you can ask for another card so that, uh, it’s not a one 

shot deal here.  Uh, we definitely want to encourage your 

questions for the question and answer part of the program.  We 

continue now.  Speaking for the resolution, Vernon Briggs.    

VERNON BRIGGS 

Thank you very much.  It’s a pleasure to be here.  Please don’t let 

the other side confuse you.  This is not about legal immigration.  

There’s a difference between legal immigration and illegal 

immigration.  The topic tonight, which the vote is supposed to be 

on, is illegal im…immigration -- undocumented workers, if you 

want to call them that – but illegal immigration.  That’s the issue 

and that’s the principle that I’m, uh, uh, that I’m in favor of 

stopping.  Ille…And there are three reasons, basically.  And I 

want to elaborate on each in a moment.  The first is that illegal 

immigration is not a victim…victimless crime.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 20. 

 

 

 

 

There are people who lose and lose in big ways.  And these are 

the most vulnerable people in our society – not the privileged, not 

the well-off, who…whom government is suppo…does a very, a 

pretty good job of protecting – but the most vulnerable, the 

unskilled, the poorly educated, the poorly trained, 

disproportionately youth, disproportionate minority, 

disproportionately women who bear the, the competition with 

illegal immigrants.  And they’re hurt very badly.  Just because 

some people win and other people lose doesn’t mean it’s on 

average, nothing happens.  It’s a very, it has a very detrimental 

impact on those who lose.  Secondly, and I to go back and talk 

about a moment, illegal immigration does erode one of the basic 

pillars of this society – the, the rule of law.  And when we make 

mockeries of our laws we br…we, we engender, we, we, we 

encourage cynicism about the society in which we live in.   

 

What’s the sense of passing laws if nobody obeys them?  And 

lastly, I want to talk about the fact that illegal immigration 

exposes in a very obvious way the seamier side of our wonderful 

democracy.  Uh, the willingness of some to tolerate the 

exploitation of human beings, uh, in our society, to find some 

ways to rationalize it.  And the failure to stop this, these sores 

allows them then to, to fester and make conditions in this 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 21. 

 

 

 

country much worse.  It breeds cynicism about what our really 

core values of this nation are.  But before I elaborate on those I 

want to say briefly how I got involved with this.  I was invi…I 

became involved in this when I was a very young professor 

teaching at the University of Texas, when a man named Cesar 

Chavez came through Austin on the way to try to organize farm 

workers in south Texas in 1966.   

 

And I joined with that movement and I went down to the border 

for the first time.  I was not a Texan.  I saw the border and I knew 

right away that the first day I was on the picket line that this 

strike was lost.  We were overwhelmed by strike breakers and I’m 

saying to this day those, those people are still not organized in 

south Texas.  And, uh, from those years in the Sixties and 

Seventies there was no greater spokesman for ending illegal 

immigration in this country than Cesar Chavez, who sued the 

Carter Administration for, uh, for its unwillingness to enforce 

immigration laws before we even had employer sanctions.  Just 

trying to say these people shouldn’t be in here.  That was 

Chavez’s line.  And he believed it very strongly in those days 

when he was actively trying to organize farm workers.  And he 

certainly made a big impression on me for the rest of my life.   

 

It’s also the case that I believe the position that we’re arguing is 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 22. 

 

 

 

supported by the overwhelming balance of re…of research and 

findings about the adverse impact of illegal immigration on 

individuals and on our society.  I want to elaborate on the three 

points now.  First of all, with respect to adverse impact, there are 

ninety million – in a newspaper article just in last week’s Ithaca 

Journal – ninety million people that are adults in a population in 

the United States who only have only a high school diploma or 

less – ninety million.  That’s half of the adult population of the 

entire country.  Of that number, fifty million are in the civilian 

labor force.  Almost one-third of the labor force doesn’t, has only 

a high school diploma or less.  The problem this country faces, as 

this article makes, discusses very clearly, is that we have an 

over-supply of unqualified people in the country.  It’s not that we 

have a shortage of unskilled workers that we need undocumented 

workers.   

 

And that over-supply is the group that are so adversely affected 

by illegal immigration.  Those are the people overwhelmingly who 

are adversely affected in terms of their wage depression and 

limited opportunities.  They’re the ones who have to compete with 

illegal immigration, immigrants for jobs.  Uh, and that’s the ones 

we should, would be concerned with – the people that had the 

highest unemployment rates.  The highest unemployment rates 

in the United States are those people in the high school grades, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 23. 

 

 

 

or high school-less, uh, uh, uh, cohort.  Uh, the unemployment 

rate is, is over, it’s almost six percent for people without high 

school diplomas and for those people in some groups, even 

blacks without high school diplomas, it’s all…it’s, it’s twelve 

percent right now.  So it’s hard to make any argument that there 

is a great shortage of unskilled workers when the highest 

unemployment rates in the United States are held by those who 

have the lowest level of education.   

 

Just what we’d expect, but the other side makes it out as if 

there’s a great shortage of unskilled workers in this country that 

would document, that would, uh, warrant the, uh, the coming of 

undocumented workers.  That is absolutely not true.  Absolutely 

not true.  This, uh, this labor market is in surplus and that’s the 

problem.  Why income levels at the bottom, uh, don’t go up, 

wages at the bottom don’t go up, why income distribution in this 

country is coming, uh, increasingly skewed, heading toward 

greater inequality.  It’s, uh, and it’s, it’s a very dangerous thing 

for a society to have happen to it.  Uh, we all know that if 

undocumented workers were pouring into the professional and 

legal ranks of this country, if they were coming into the professor 

ranks or the lawyer ranks or the doctors’ ranks or the business 

executive ranks, this issue would have been solved a long time 

ago.  [LAUGHTER]   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 24. 

 

 

 

 

We all understand very clearly that this, uh, that the 

undocumented workers coming into the legal profession or the 

doctors’ profession five hundred thousand a year, was not good 

for the doctors in this country or the lawyers in this country who 

have to invest, uh, invest in their education and training and the, 

all the rest of it to get to those positions.  Undocumented, not 

legal immigrants, but undocumented, illegal immigrants.  But 

somehow when it comes to low-wage workers, low-skilled 

workers, farm workers, maids, yardmen and all the rest of these 

things – landscapers and restaurant employees and hotel 

employees – people forget about the laws of economics –  that, 

uh, that, that, uh, increasing the supply of those workers when 

you have unemployment already, of high unemployment rates 

already in those markets, can only depress wages and working 

conditions and make conditions worse for those at the bottom of 

our society, and society.   

 

So, again, this is the first reason.  Uh, illegal immigrants will 

always win in the competition for jobs.  They become preferred 

workers.  It’s not that U.S. citizens will not do these jobs.  

Employers don’t want them.  Illegal immigrants will always work 

for the longest hours, the lowest pay or the worst working 

conditions because no matter how bad conditions are in this 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 25. 

 

 

 

country, they’re infinitely better than they are in the countries 

that they came from.  Remember, two billion people on this 

planet today earn less than two dollars a day.  Two billion – half 

of all the workers in the world today.  That’s what they make.  So 

any condition in this country is way better than what they have 

had from most of the countries that they’ve come from.   

 

So in the competition for jobs they will always be a preferred 

worker if employers can have them.  My view is they should not 

be allowed to have access to that supply of labor.  That is a, that, 

that – and that’s what our law says, that’s what our law requires.  

It’s just we don’t enforce our laws.  Secondly, the, the issue of, of, 

of the rule of law.  Illegal immigrants, those who enter without 

inspection or overstay Visas are creating, are committing, uh, 

criminal misdemeanors.  If they, if they over-stay their Visa – 

sorry, if they, if they’ve been deported and then come back in, it’s 

a felony offense.  But we don’t enforce the laws.  Uh, they get 

away, so there’s little risk, really in actually following any of those 

laws.   

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

[OVERLAP]  One.    

VERNON BRIGGS  

 [OVERLAP]  Since, since 1986 illegal immigrants who come to 

the United States, um, uh, uh, are not required to work but they 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 26. 

 

 

 

do work.  Again, the laws that are not being enforced.  I’m, I’m 

real, way behind, I guess, in what I wanted to say.  It’s, uh, it’s 

illegal to use false documents, it’s illegal to, to use somebody 

else’s identity.  It’s illegal to use someone’s else, the Social 

Security number.  All those things have criminal offense but then 

nobody applies the laws.  How many laws are these people of, uh, 

are entitled to violate without people becoming cynical about our 

rule of, our rule of law?  Uh, uh, driver’s licenses, social services, 

all the rest of it.  Um, uh, the last point I wanted to make was 

about the, about the, the fragileness of our democracy.  Uh, this 

exposes the seamier side of it by, by allowing illegal immigration 

to go on.  It gives tacit, uh, uh, approval to their presence in our 

society and to its human, its human smugglers and abusive 

employers and unsafe work environments.  And all those things 

are, are, go hand in hand with illegal immigration.  The result is 

to encourage millions to keep coming.  Um, so that they – and it 

also --   

JOHN HOCKENBERRY  

[OVERLAP]  Speaking for the resolution, Vernon Briggs.  Thank 

you very much.  [APPLAUSE]    

VERNON BRIGGS  

[OVERLAP]  Thank you.  Much more to say.   

JOHN HOCKENBERRY  

Our next speaker against the resolution, Enrique Morones.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 27. 

 

 

 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

Thank you.  Yeah.  Buenos noches.  Good evening.  Shalom.  

[LAUGHTER]  I’m glad to be in, uh, beautiful New York City once 

again.  I wanted to, uh, first of all, thank everybody here and, and 

for the invitation to share a few moments with you.  It’s important 

that we discuss in a civil manner and, uh, that we talk about the 

truth about this immigration situation.  And I want to find out in 

the audience, uh, how many Native Americans are here?  How 

many hundred percent Native Americans that are indigenous, 

that could trace their roots to the tribes that were here thousands 

of years ago?  [AUDIENCE RESPONSE]  You know, maybe I might 

be the only one but I’ve gotta admit, only my dad’s side of the 

family -- eight thousand years.  And on my mom’s side of the 

family I can only go back to the 1600s.  And so it’s just to kind of 

say that even though this is a great country and I love the United 

States – I’m a U.S. citizen.  I was born and raised in San Diego – 

my family came from Mexico and it came like most Mexican 

families.  It came legally.  And it came, like most immigrants 

come to this country, looking for a better opportunity.  And it was 

driven by economics.  My dad’s job had an opportunity in San 

Diego and, and we moved to San Diego.  And I was born in San 

Diego.   

 

It’s very important that we look back on the history of this great 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 28. 

 

 

 

country.  And I don’t think that we’ve had a lot of welcoming, uh, 

to immigrants, especially if you look at it from the Native 

American point of view or the people of color point of view.  I don’t 

see very much diversity but we’re all the same race – the human 

race.  And I think it’s important that we treat each other in such 

a manner.  And Cesar Chavez was mentioned a, a moment ago.  

They’re one of our biggest supporters, the United Farm Workers.  

And I ask you in your prayers to pray for Elena Chavez who was 

diagnosed with colon can…cancer just a couple of days ago – 

Cesar Chavez’s wife.  And, uh, they’re, they’re big supporters of 

our movement and they’ve helped us in, in the efforts that we’re 

continuing, to have more humane laws.  Ethel Kennedy, uh, 

Robert Kennedy’s wife, is really the one that inspired me to come 

out of the shadows when we started our work as, as Border 

Angels back in 1986.   

 

And you’ll see some information on some flyers I have in the back 

for our all-volunteer organization.  What we’re best known for is 

putting water in the desert – putting water in the desert to save 

people’s lives.  But that’s not the only thing we do.  We also were 

instrumental in the massive demonstrations last year which had 

three and a half million people take to the streets and say, We 

want humane and comprehensive immigration reform.  We don’t 

want to have any more deaths on the border.  We don’t want to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 29. 

 

 

 

have this hate radio and hate television that many of you are 

familiar with, that’s really sprung up in the last several years.  

Border Angels is a non-partisan faith based organization and our 

mar…what our mission statement says, "If I was hungry did you 

give me to eat, if I was thirsty did you give me to drink?"  Period.   

 

In October of 1994 the United States government decided to build 

a wall between the United States and Mexico.  We protested 

against this wall.  What the government said it’s gonna stop the 

flow of migrants.  And I said, Why would it stop the flow of 

migrants?  The United States invaded Mexico in 1846, took half 

its territory and there was a treaty that was signed – the Treaty of 

Guadalupe de Hidalgo – where people were supposed to be able 

to go back and forth, freely.  That was never honored.  But there’s 

nobody alive today that was there when the United States 

invaded Mexico in 1846.  What country has not committed sins?  

Every country.  Every country has racist, every country has 

people that misinform the public.  So let’s stick to the facts.  And 

I want to tell you a couple of stories.  In October of 1994 the 

government put up this wall, called Operation Gatekeeper.  And 

it’s been estimated by the flyer that I have in the back that four 

thousand five hundred people have died in the last thirteen 

years.   



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 30. 

 

 

 

 

And that’s an estimate, according to the Border Patrol.  But I 

think the number is closer to ten thousand people.  It, whether 

it’s four thousand, five hundred or ten thousand, people should 

not be dying because they’re coming here for a better 

opportunity.  Lucretia Dominguez was one of those people.  She 

crossed with two of her children, Jesus and Nora.  Jesus, a 

fifteen year old little boy and Nora, a seven year old little girl.  She 

crossed from Sonora to Arizona.  And she crossed the only way 

she could because poor people cannot get Visas.  So when people 

tell you, Why don’t they just get in line? – What line?  There is no 

line.  So she crossed.  She crossed with an unethical smuggler, 

like many of them are – and we’re opposed to that, of course – 

and a group of migrants.  And what happened was, they ran out 

of water.  The smugglers said, "You’re slowing us down.  You 

gotta cross on your own…" 

 

They left, she left her behind with two of her children.  She 

literally died in the arms of Jesus, her fifteen year old son.  And 

her sister, his sister Nora was watching this.  Two children in the 

middle of the desert were wandering around with their dead 

mother there.  Thank God the border patrol found them and sent 

them back to Mexico.  Their grandfather, Cesario, who is from 

Zacatecas, says, I don’t want to leave my daughter out there.  So 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 31. 

 

 

 

he went out looking for his daughter.  He found one body, 

another body, another body before he found the body of his 

daughter.  So if Cesario can find three other bodies, how many 

bodies are out there?  We think it’s approximately ten thousand 

people that have died.  Not only men, but also children.  Marco 

Antonio Viasenor [PH]  – he died. 

 

He was a five year old little boy.  And when he ran out of water he 

asked his dad for water.  But his dad didn’t answer him.  So he 

asked seventeen other men.  They didn’t answer him.  Cause all 

eighteen men had died, including Marco Antonio Viasenor, in the 

back in the back of a semi-truck in Victoria, Texas.  This is the 

real story of what’s happening right now.  It’s inhumane and we 

can do better than that as a people.  We are a great people and 

we are a great nation.  There’s a lot of myths and 

mis…misinformation that’s out there.  And we’ve heard some 

hateful terms, even in the discussion today -- sucking in, 

homegirl.  This type of terminology to dehumanize people is 

unacceptable.  Jose Luis Cisneros was attacked by three 

American kids – a hate crime, which is at an all time high right 

now in the United States.  We see the vigilante groups, like the 

Minute Men, which President Bush has called vigilante, uh, hate 

groups. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 32. 

 

 

 

 

Today is like yesterday.  Second and third generation immigrants 

and half of them are not from Mexico.  It was referred to Mexican 

immigrants.  Half of the undocumented people are not from 

Mexico.  They come from other parts of the world for economic 

opportunity.  They assimilate.  They learn the language, just like 

your, like you did in, in the, in the many years that you’ve been 

here.  There was a man that said, They’re not learning the 

language, they’re not assimilating.  They want to just practice 

their own culture.  We gotta stop them.  [That man was Benjamin 

Franklin, talking about the Germanization of the United States.  

This has been going on for many, many years.  There’s two 

hundred million plus undocumented people in the world.  Only 

four percent of them live in the United States and of those twelve 

million, a third of them came here legally and their Visas expired 

– work, tourist or student Visas. 

 

Arnold Schwarzenegger’s in that category.  Maybe we should have 

sent him back.  But then there’s eight million other people that 

cannot get a Visa.  These are poor people looking for a better 

economic opportunity and they’re sacrificing everything coming 

across the border.  Ninety percent of them come for economic 

reasons, ten percent come from fam…for family reunification.  

They already have a relative living here.  As Dan mentioned, it’s 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 33. 

 

 

 

an economic plus, the undocumented people in this country.  

They’ll tell you that schools and hospitals are closing.  They are.  

We need health care reform, we need educational reform.  But 

don’t blame the migrants.  It’s easy to blame the most vulnerable 

sector of society.  Four percent of the world’s population lives in 

the United States -- three hundred million people – yet we 

consume over twenty percent of the world’s natural resources, 

fifty percent of the world’s illegal drugs.  We have thirty percent – 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

[OVERLAP]  One. 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

…of the world’s population, uh, uh, environmental damage is 

caused by American companies.  We could do better than that.  

Crime, the Department of Justice issued a study in which 

undocumented people are less prone to commit crime and less 

violent.  Criminals are lazy people.  Why are they going to cross a 

border to commit crime?  It’s legal versus illegal.  If we use that 

premise all the time we would still have slavery, women could not 

vote, we’d still have children working in factories.  We need to 

build bridges of communication and triple fences of su…se…of 

separation.  What good is it if we gain the whole world but lose 

our souls?  There’s three and a half million people that have 

marched for immigration reform.  Your grandchildren are going to 

ask you one day, What did you do when they were raiding 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 34. 

 

 

 

families at three in the morning, when, when two people were 

dying every day crossing the border? 

 

The whole world is watching.  Do the right thing.  We need 

humane and comprehensive immigration reform.  We’re a better 

country than that.  We’re a better people than that.  And it’s 

important that we practice what we preach.  We should love our 

neighbor.  And we were, when we were told to love our neighbor 

I’m sure it didn’t mean to kill ‘em.  Thank you all and God bless 

you. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

[OVERLAP]  Enrique Morones, [APPLAUSE]  speaking against the 

resolution, Enrique Morones.  If you have questions pass them to 

the aisle at the end of the row where you are so that we can make 

sure that we have plenty of questions for the question and 

answer period.  Our next speaker is speaking for the resolution, 

Mark Krikorian. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

Apparently I’m here to argue that we should not love our 

neighbor.  But that won’t be the substance of my talk.  

[LAUGHTER]  Uh, the other side is claiming that, uh, the flow of 

people into the United States is inevitable, that it’s like the tides 

or continental drift and that we need to lie back and pretend to 

enjoy it.  The fact, though, is that there’s nothing inevitable 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 35. 

 

 

 

about, uh, the flow of people from abroad.  It’s an artifact of 

government policy.  The analogy they often use is to the fifty-five 

mile an hour speed limit on an interstate and that it’s unnatural 

and therefore it has, that’s why people are violating the, uh, 

speed limit.  The fact, though, is that an interstate highway is 

engineered for a particular speed.  It’s designed for seventy mile 

an hour traffic -- the, uh, angles, the sightlines, the width of the 

shoulders.  No economy, our economy is not engineered for any 

particular level of immigration. 

 

It can adapt to high levels of immigration, even higher than we 

have now.  It can adapt to dramatically lower levels of 

immigration.  The question is, what are the side effects, what are 

the consequences, what level of immigration do we want?  

Through our elected representatives we’ve made a decision – 

incoherent sometimes as it is – about what our legal immigration 

policy should be.  Given what our legal immigration policy is it 

needs to be enforced, whatever it happens to be.  If it’s changed, 

if the numbers are increased, decreased, what have you, the, the 

law needs to be enforced if it’s to mean anything.  And there’s two 

ways you enforce immigration law.  One is the conventional 

method of arresting and detaining and deporting people.  We do 

that.  We don’t really frankly do as much of that as, uh, you 

might think, but we do some of that and we need to do more of it. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 36. 

 

 

 

 

But at least as important, if not more important, is the other 

element of enforcement of any laws --  but specifically in 

immigration laws -- is to deter lawbreaking, to dissuade those 

abroad from sneaking in or overstaying their Visas and to 

encourage, especially the more recent illegal immigrants, to leave 

and go home.  Um, and the welcome that we have, in fact, 

extended and been extending to illegal immigrants for many 

years now, uh, it subverts that second element of law 

enforcement.  So what that means is we have two choices --  

either focus even more on rounding up, arresting, detaining and 

deporting people, leaving that as our sole approach to enforce 

immigration law – or just give up enforcing immigration law and 

have de facto open borders – which, despite all the disclaimers, is 

what the other side wants.  Now, um, just enforcing immigration 

law in the conventional way – border patrol agents, uh, 

immi…uh, immigration agents inside the country raiding work 

places and homes – relying only on that kind of enforcement can’t 

work. 

 

Uh, we haven’t actually done all that much of it, uh, but however 

much we increase it, it can’t be the sole basis of our immigration 

enforcement approach.  We need to have, uh, deterrence and 

what you might call encouraging voluntary compliance.  After all, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 37. 

 

 

 

the IRS doesn’t arrest everybody.  It doesn’t, it isn’t in 

everybody’s, uh, accountant’s office, making sure the rule, the, 

the forms are filled out properly. Uh, a few people are made 

examples of, and everyone else - most everyone else, uh, in our 

country remarkably compared to most places - complies with the 

law more or less, voluntarily. 

 

And so, what is it that we are doing?  What is this “welcome” that 

we are talking about?  What does it consist of?  What are we 

doing to essentially subvert enforcement of our own immigration 

laws?  Some of these things you have already, um, you are 

familiar with, of course.  Uh, Mr. Rosenkranz referred to, uh, 

Governor Spitzer’s rule on driver’s licenses.  Uh, the driver’s 

license is, in fact, our national ID system.  And anything that 

makes it easy for illegal immigrants to get licenses, means it 

makes it easy for them to live here and to embed themselves in 

our society. 

 

Jobs.  In 19…  It was only in 1986 that the employment of illegal 

immigrants was prohibited by law.  Before that, it was explicitly 

permitted in something called, not coincidentally, the Texas 

Proviso, where employers were held, uh, unaccountable for 

employing illegal immigrants.  We did change it in 1986.  But 

contrary to Dan’s claims, we have done nothing to enforce it in 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 38. 

 

 

 

the past 20 years.  Nothing.  Bupkis.  We have gone through sort 

of, uh, cabooky efforts at finding a few people, as Heather 

mentioned.  Uh, in 2003 was the low point of enforcement.  And 

three employers, in the entire United States, were fined for 

knowing employment of illegal immigrants.  We don’t even do 

basic things like tell employers, that they have submitted a fake 

or stolen Social Security number, uh, from an illegal immigrant 

employer…uh, employee.  And that matters, because the majority 

of illegal immigrants work on the books.  They actually gave their 

employers a fake or a stolen Social Security number.  We don’t 

even tell employers and hold them accountable for making sure 

that that information is correct. 

 

Another example of the “welcome” we extend immigrants is, uh, 

bank accounts.  The Treasury Department, just a couple of years 

ago…told banks inexplicitly, in writing…that it was OK for them 

to give bank accounts to illegal immigrants using, um, the 

Mexican government’s illegal alien ID card.  That that was 

explicitly permitted by the law, and they shouldn’t, uh, be 

dissuaded from doing that. 

 

Um, another example.  In-state tuition.  Now, there is not that 

many illegal aliens going to state universities and getting, uh, 

in-state tuition subsidies.  But symbolically, it’s very important.  



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 39. 

 

 

 

It is another part of the “welcome” that we extend illegal 

immigrants, which subverts our efforts to make whatever our 

immigration policy is stick. 

 

What we really need in ending this “welcome” is to pursue what 

I’d like to call a “firewall” strategy.  Make it not just difficult to get 

in the country, which is something we need to do, but also make 

it hard to gain access to the important institutions of our 

society…so that it becomes as difficult as possible to be an illegal 

immigrant.  So you can’t get a driver’s license, you can’t get a job, 

etc.  Only in that way can we successful dissuade new illegal 

immigrants from sneaking into the country, and persuade some 

significant portion of those to leave.  That’s…  I describe that as 

an “attrition” policy.  In other words, not magically eliminating 

the illegal immigration problem, but causing the illegal immigrant 

population… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

One. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

…instead of growing every year, to start declining every year.  It’s 

a realistic approach.  It’s not a pipe dream.  Heather mentioned 

the Pakistani illegal immigrants after 9/11.  But, um, the New 

York Times and the USA Today just in the past couple of weeks 

have written about how the new, very modest but real, increases 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 40. 

 

 

 

in immigration enforcement are in fact impelling significant 

numbers of people to get the message - that the party is over, and 

it’s time for them to go home. 

 

It works.  Our research shows we could reduce the illegal 

population by half in five years, through normal law enforcement 

methods - not tattoos, not machine guns, not landmines - normal 

law enforcement, consistently applied.  And that’s the key.  

Normal law enforcement, consistently applied.  And not 

welcoming illegal immigrants with one hand, while we - in some 

instances - make it harder on the other hand.  We need a 

consistent, unmixed message to illegal immigrants.  And you’ll be 

surprised… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Speaking for the resolution, Mark Krikorian.  And thank you very 

much, Mark.  [APPLAUSE] 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

Thank you. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Our last speaker for this portion, speaking against the resolution, 

is Karen Narasaki. 

KAREN NARASAKI 

Thanks.  Good evening.  While superficially the topic tonight is 

about “undocumented immigration,” the debate taking place in 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 41. 

 

 

 

this country is really a deeper one.  And it’s about whether 

immigrants - legal or not - are bad for America.  And if you listen 

closely to Heather, it’s about whether Latino immigrants 

specifically are in fact destroying the fabric of our culture. 

 

Now, everybody here actually on stage agrees on one thing, and 

that is our current immigration system is broken.  What we 

disagree about is what is broken about it, and how best to fix it. 

 

If you vote for us, it’s because you share our belief, that 

immigrants are in fact integral to who we are as America, and 

that they and their children are integral to the betterment and 

future of our country.  Indeed, our core values as a nation are 

constantly renewed by immigrants, who come here seeking 

freedom and fairness, and opportunity for themselves and their 

families.  The vibrancy and boldness of the youthful “can do” 

attitude, the spirit of America, is refreshed by immigrants who 

have the courage, the strength and initiative to leave their homes 

and their loved ones - and in many cases, uh, as Enrique said - 

risk their lives to be part of the American Dream. 

 

Throughout our history, there have been people arguing that 

immigrants are “taking jobs and failing to assimilate.”  That 

immigrants from certain religious, ethnic or racial backgrounds 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 42. 

 

 

 

are “culturally unfit or unwilling to be Americans.”  That they 

bring “ignorance, poverty and disease, and threaten the 

dominance of English.”  That’s what was said about the Know 

Nothings who argued about the Italians, the Irish, the Germans, 

the Jews, and even the Asians in the last century.  And that’s 

what’s being said by the restrictionists today.  Yet, in every case, 

immigrants and their children built businesses, they learned 

English, they joined the military - often in the face of 

discrimination against them, because of their religion or because 

of their race.  Current immigrants are learning English even 

faster than the past - and are helping to drive the creation of 

small businesses here in New York and around the country.  And 

as we stand here debating tonight, immigrants and their sons 

and daughters are in Afghanistan and Iraq, defending American 

values.  And I am talking about immigrants who are not even yet 

citizens. 

 

Now, restrictionists have consistently been on the wrong side of 

history.  And if you vote with them, it’s because - despite our long 

experience as a nation - you share their doubt about the power of 

American culture and American values.  Rather than dealing with 

their very discomforting dislocations - and they are scary, 

brought about by globalization and the new Internet driven 

economy - it’s easier to blame immigrants and target them for 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 43. 

 

 

 

their fears, as if, if they all went away, magically we wouldn’t have 

these new challenges. 

 

They hope to keep jobs in America by building high walls.  And if 

we follow their old-school, isolationist prescription, America’s 

ability to generate jobs and compete in the global economy will 

fail.  Before computers and the Internet maybe, and the 

globalization of corporations, it might have been possible to lock 

those jobs in.  That’s no longer the case.  Even agra business, is 

moving [LAUGHS] across borders, with American companies 

buying farmland in Mexico, because they can’t get the workers 

they need here in the U.S.  And what about…?  What does that 

mean in terms of our food security…that we can no longer fully 

feed ourselves? 

 

Vernon talked about “class.”  Well, it’s true that immigration 

challenges at all levels, actually.  The American Bar Association 

magazine this month featured a story on the outsourcing of legal 

work to India.  Because the reality is today, with the Internet, 

even if you keep immigrants out, it doesn’t mean that the jobs are 

staying here.  All of us agree that a system which results in a 

huge number of undocumented… undocumented immigrants 

who are extremely vulnerable to the exploitation that the 

professor talked about, is not good.  Because many restrictionists 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 44. 

 

 

 

believe that immigrants are the root of these problems, their 

solutions tend to be reactionary policies that foster division, and 

actually backfire on communities and American citizens. 

 

I want to be clear.  Despite [LAUGHS] the back and forth, we are 

not arguing for open borders, and we are not arguing that our 

laws should not be enforced.  What we are saying is let’s be 

smart.  Let’s talk about what laws need to change, so in fact they 

are enforceable and they make sense.  Laws only function when 

they are humane.  And right now, our immigration laws are not 

humane, and they do not make sense. 

 

As Dan said, we don’t provide a realistic number of visas or 

permanent green cards.  The backlog for spouses and children to 

join with a legal permanent resident is now five to ten years.  Is 

that smart?  That’s why we have so many undocumented 

immigration.  How many people would wait ten years to be with 

their spouse or child?  The backlog for high-tech workers to get a 

green card, once they have already proven their value to our 

economy, is now five to seven years.  The number of visas 

available for temporary, low-skilled workers is 5,000 a year.  Now 

we could debate what the numbers should be.  But I think most 

of you would find it strikingly unrealistic to say, that 5,000 is the 

right number. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 45. 

 

 

 

 

Restrictionists talk about attrition through raids and hostile 

policies.  And what they really mean is making our community so 

uncomfortable that people who - as was pointed out by Mark - 

are finding much better wages here, are gonna be forced back 

across the border.  We believe that it makes sense to reform the 

system to provide sufficient channels for legal entry, bring the 

current undocumented out of the shadows.  Nobody really 

believes we can get 12 million out. 

And more vigorously enforce existing anti-discrimination, wage 

and hour, health and safety laws in the workplace.  The 

restrictionists don’t talk about that.  That is why undocumented 

get exploited.  That’s why employers like to hire them.  Because 

we are not enforcing the wage and hour, and health and safety.  

Ten years ago, there was one inspector of restaurants in New 

York for wage and hour.  That is ridiculous.  We can reduce 

incentives without punishing everybody. 

 

For example, what is going to happen now, Bush…  The Bush 

administration is going to now require employers to match their 

Social Security numbers.  And if you don’t…  Uh, if you have a 

“no match,” you have 30 days to clear it up.  30 days?  The 

Inspector General of the Social Security Administration says, “We 

have at least 17 million errors in the data.”  There is only 12 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 46. 

 

 

 

million undocumented.  [LAUGHS]  So what does that mean?  

That means a lot of us… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

One. 

KAREN NARASAKI 

…are gonna get caught up in that system.  So what we are saying 

is, let’s have reasonable laws. 

 

Mark talks about “licenses.”  Well, we are not giving licenses to 

immigrants to help them.  We are giving licenses because we 

would prefer that everybody driving on the road can get 

insurance and take the tests and know the rules of the road.  By 

not providing them with licenses…with driver’s license, we are 

only punishing everybody else who is on the road with them. 

 

At bottom, the question is - do we really want to be the kind of 

community that refuses emergency health care to someone 

because they can’t produce a birth certificate or a green card?  

Do we want to be the kind of community like Riverside, New 

Jersey, that found that their economic revival of their downtown 

was reversed overnight when they decided it was best to pass 

hostile symbolic measures?  And now Main Street is boarded up, 

and property values have tanked. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 47. 

 

 

 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Speaking against the resolution… 

KAREN NARASAKI 

Thank you. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

…Karen Narasaki.  Thank you very much.  [APPLAUSE]  Let’s give 

a warm applause to all of the speakers who have set the table for 

the debate.  Thanks to all of you. 

 

I am now ready to announce the results of the pre-debate vote, 

however you are thinking now.  This is a bit of a snapshot of what 

you were thinking just a few moments ago.  Before the debate, 

this is how you voted.  For the resolution, 42 percent, let’s stop 

welcoming undocumented immigrants.  Against the resolution, 

34 percent.  Undecided, 24 percent.  Now we’ll have a chance to 

vote and see if those numbers change, at the conclusion of the 

debate tonight. 

 

We are now ready to begin the question and answer portion of the 

program.  If you haven’t done so, please write your question down 

and send it to the aisles, it will get to me, and we’ll have a chance 

to be a part of this, uh…a part of the, uh…this more lively part of 

the debate. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 48. 

 

 

 

 

Now, if I call on you…I will pick from the cards, I will call on you.  

Please stand, don’t ask your question until a microphone comes 

to you.  And please identify yourself, if you are a member of the 

press.  You know, I can’t say this enough.  Make your question 

short and to the point.  Um, there is only one Charlie Rose.  

[LAUGHTER]  We love him. 

 

I am gonna begin though by offering a question to each side of, 

uh, the audience here.  Um, and I, and I think it focuses on what 

I consider to be something of the elephant in the room in this 

whole debate.  There are an estimated 12 million undocumented 

immigrants in the United States.  Um, for those of you supporting 

the resolution - and I’ll address to you, Heather.  Uh, under any 

regime that you have discussed tonight of “law enforcement” or 

“changes in laws,” how would you define “success”?  And in the 

case that you would achieve that success, how many fewer of 

that 12 million undocumented immigrants would be in the 

country, after your regime is adopted?  And to this side of the 

table, under any sort of change in immigration laws that any of 

you envision, how many of those 12 million would be allowed to 

stay, conditionally, unconditionally, or under any sort of regime 

that you envision?  I’ll begin with you, Heather. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 49. 

 

 

 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

Well, I, uh, I sort of reject the question, John, ‘cause I don’t think 

it’s necessary to put an absolute number on it.  I would think 

“success” would be, uh, seeing the changed decision making that, 

that Mark and I spoke about.  That once you start enforcing the 

law, you are gonna see much fewer people come across the 

border. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Well, “much fewer”?  How, how many fewer? 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

In, in one stretch of Texas that started, uh, not just putting 

people on the border, but detaining them, uh, after they were 

apprehended - rather than the current “catch and release policy” 

- there has been a 50 percent drop in illegal, uh, crossings…in a 

few months.  The Washington Post itself declared that this shows 

that the way to get control of the border is simply to enforce the 

laws…on the books.  We don’t need new laws;  we just need to 

enforce what’s already there… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

All right. 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

…something that has not been done. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

So, in five years, if enforcement - under the regime that you are 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 50. 

 

 

 

talking about - actually took place, how many “fewer” 

undocumented immigrants would you expect to be in the United 

States…down from 12 million? 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

I, I, I really couldn’t predict.  But fewer…  Any fewer would be a 

success.  Whether it would be half that, uh…I, I can’t say.  But 

the fact is, is that right now, we are sending a message to the, 

hmmm, billions of people in this world that, once they get across 

the border, nothing happens to them.  If we have an “amnesty,” I 

can predict what will happen:  More will be coming in illegally.  

That is what the consequences have been of every amnesty…in 

this country…and in Europe.  Uh, that record is quite clear. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

All right.  Thank you, Heather.  Uh, Enrique, let me ask the 

question to you.  How many would you offer, uh, the chance to 

stay, of that 12 million? 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

Well, we have approximately 12 million undocumented people in 

the country today.  And I think that the people that have…that 

are the real criminals…those are the people that should be in 

prison and…that which is a very, very slow - a very, very small 

percentage.  So the overwhelming majority of these people would 

be allowed to stay and become documented.  They are not looking 

for citizenship;  they are looking for a document, like the driver’s 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 51. 

 

 

 

license.  Some sort of document.  And a driver’s license doesn’t 

give ‘em the right to be here, by the way.  But they are looking for 

a document that allows them to stay.  It’s an economic plus to 

have the economic…the, the undocumented people here.  There 

is people from the Wall Street Journal here, Business Week.  They 

have all said that it’s an economic plus.  Seven billion dollars a 

year goes to Social Security just from the undocumented 

community.  The median age of the U.S. population is 40 years 

old.  The undocumented community is 25 years old.  We need to 

replenish our workforce.  Uh, uh, uh, uh, you know, what, what’s 

happening in this country today, it’s very, very important.  These 

people are here to work.  When was the last time you saw a 

Latino on a corner with a sign that says, “We’ll work for food”?  

You don’t see it.  You’ll see ten of them at the Home Depot ready 

to jump in your car.  We need the workers.  Unemployment is at 

4-1/2 percent in this country.  So they are an economic plus.  

They are, they are a plus to the values of this country.  And it’s 

what that makes this a great country - a United States of America 

with all the colors.  And so I say the 12 million people that are 

here - with the exception of the criminals, which is a very, very 

small percentage - they should be allowed to stay and have a 

pathway to legalization. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

So very close to 12 million undocumented immigrants would be 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 52. 

 

 

 

allowed a chance to become citizens, under your plan? 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

Mm-hmm.  To have document.  To become documented. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Right.  To become documented citizens.  All right.  Uh, Gerry 

Ohrstrom has a question.  He is on the left-hand side, in Row H.  

Could you stand?  Please. 

GERRY OHRSTROM 

Uh, thank you.  Um, Heather, I think I’ll address this to you, my 

good friend. 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

Thank you. 

GERRY OHRSTROM 

Uh, given my utterly blind luck in being born American, by what 

moral authority can I deny that same opportunity and privilege to 

any of the world’s other six billion inhabitants?  And any of your 

colleagues are welcome to respond to that as well. 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

I think it is what nations do.  They have borders.  Uh, if you are 

suggesting that there should be no more nations in this world, 

that is a very radical change.  Uh, and I don’t think that our, uh, 

neighbors to our south would agree with that either.  [LAUGHS] 

You know, uh, Enrique talks about our “inhumane laws.”  Well, 

Mexico has about the fiercest, uh, border patrol that you can 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 53. 

 

 

 

imagine, that rounds up Central Americans that are coming in 

transit to get to the United States.  Uh, this has been a 

prerogative of nations uh, throughout history, to decide who 

comes in.  It, it’s not a “moral” question.  It’s simply the right of, 

of nations to decide who is, is within their borders and who is 

outside of them.  Mexico, uh, you know…  Several years ago, a 

governor of Baja suggested that perhaps Mexico has some 

responsibility for preventing these deaths, uh, in the desert, 

because they have a law that requires people leaving the country 

to exit through lawful ports of exit and entry.  Uh, and he 

suggested that maybe if Mexico started enforcing that law, it 

would decrease the deaths.  And of course, this created a massive 

outcry, uh, among the Mexican elites, who believe that it is the 

right of Mexicans to immigrate into the country illegally.  I 

disagree with that and I think, uh, Mexico itself would say the 

same about people from Nicaragua and El Salvador. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

John, could I just answer that? 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Yeah.  Go ahead, Mark. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

And I would have to disagree just a tiny bit and say that it is a 

moral question.  That the nation is a moral good.  Uh, it often 

doesn’t behave morally, but that’s a different question.  It is, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 54. 

 

 

 

hmmm…  Peoplehood is part of what we as human beings have 

programmed in us;  belonging to, uh, a people.  And that means 

that we have a greater moral responsibility to those who are - us - 

who are, uh, fellow members of our people, than we do to 

foreigners.  It doesn’t mean we have no responsibility to those 

who live outside our national community, but our priority has to 

be those who are our countrymen:  Just as you feed your 

children first, before you give money to charity.  And so, I would 

submit that, um, that, uh, arguing that everyone in the world has 

a right to come to the United States is itself immoral.  The 

argument itself is morally wrong. 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

John, if I could… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Uh, Mark Krikorian, thank you very much.  [APPLAUSE] 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

I want to… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Enrique. 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

I want to address a couple of quick… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Enrique Morones. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 55. 

 

 

 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

…quick comments.  One about the Mexico part.  And that was a, 

uh, senator, a former… a former mayor of Tijuana that made that 

statement, Hector Osuna.  And the, uh…  And, and he is right.  

We cannot ask of the north what we don’t do in the south in 

Mexico.  And I was just down in Mexico just two weeks ago.  And 

this is a worldwide phenomenon.  And Mexico definitely needs to 

do more, as do the other countries around the world.  So that, 

that…  With that being said.  But the, the impact of U.S. policies 

affects the entire world.  When you talk about the United States 

doing something, and it has a cold, it…it sneezes, the entire 

world - especially the Americas - get a cold.  When Mexico does 

something and it has problems, that stays within Mexico.  Mexico 

doesn’t want the people to leave.  They know that the future of 

Mexico is within Mexico.  But the people are starving.  We need 

to, uh, help the United States…help Mexico more develop, and 

help other countries as well.  We have that moral responsibility.  

Remember…remember what I said about four percent of the 

world’s population consuming over 20 percent of the world’s 

natural resources - the drugs and, and all these other things?  

That greatly impacts the neighboring countries.  It’s very, very 

important.  And we should have some sort of a…  The, the 

constitution of Mexico says that we have the freedom of 

movement.  We are not denied the opportunity to go to other…to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 56. 

 

 

 

other countries.  But it doesn’t encourage - contrary to what you 

have seen in these myths - people crossing to other countries 

without papers.  My organization does not encourage that.  

People should cross…cross in a humane manner.  And that’s 

what we are asking for - humane and comprehensive immigration 

reform.  Comprehensive - that 12 million people get a pathway to, 

to legal…the document.  And humane - having a humane manner 

in which people can enter, which doesn’t exist right now. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Enrique, do you…do you believe that anyone who wants to come 

to America should be allowed to come here? 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

I think there should be a process that they would go through.  

That right now, if you are poor, you don’t get that opportunity.  

And there should be that opportunity.  We should have humane 

laws to address that. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Karen Narasaki. 

KAREN NARASAKI 

Well, I think this is where we get into these false choices.  Um, 

and one of the false choices here is, we either enforce and 

become a police state, or we let everybody in the world in.  That’s 

not really the choice.  I mean, if we want to deal with Mexico…  

As Enrique says, a lot of the policies…the trade policies and other 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 57. 

 

 

 

things… that Americans have done is why…is what drives a lot of 

immigrants here.  That’s why we have a huge refugee population 

here.  So what we need to do is - in addition to looking at what 

we are doing with the system here - we need to look at, what are 

our policies around the world?  How much help are we giving to 

Mexico and other countries, who are sending countries?  How are 

we helping them to stabilize their democracies?  How are we 

helping them to grow their economies?  I mean, the Philippines is 

one of the large…the largest sending countries in the world.  They 

get more money from remittances from Filipinos who are around 

the world…than they get in foreign aid.  We have to change that.  

We have to really think outside the box.  It’s not just about 

punishing people who are here who are looking for a better life, 

but it’s - what can we do as a nation to change how we approach 

the problem?  Because it isn’t a choice of, we beat up people, or 

we let everybody in.  That is not the choice. 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

But it does sound like that’s the choice.  I have yet to hear 

anybody on the opposing team say whether they think there 

should ever be any immigration enforcement.  Do you think a 

penalty should ever be levied against somebody who comes…? 

KAREN NARASAKI 

We say… 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 58. 

 

 

 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

…into the country? 

KAREN NARASAKI 

As Heather said, we believe in enforcement.  And we are not 

talking about… 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

What would you do? 

KAREN NARASAKI 

We are talking about smart enforcement. 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

But tell me what you would do… 

KAREN NARASAKI 

But I am talking about… 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

…if somebody comes into the country illegally. 

KAREN NARASAKI 

I talked about…waging our health and safety.  And I talked 

about, if we are gonna do… 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

But that’s not immigration laws… 

KAREN NARASAKI 

…and if we are going to…  And if we are going to de…deportation, 

I don’t think it should be by raiding people, pre-dawn raids, with 

people wearing cowboy hats, carrying machine guns aimed at 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 59. 

 

 

 

children. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

So should raids be at noon? 

KAREN NARASAKI 

I don’t think that’s who we should be, as a nation. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

Should people wear different kinds of hats?  [LAUGHTER]  I 

mean, I think it’s a legitimate question.  I mean, I am not trying 

to make the joke here, but…  [APPLAUSE] 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

That’s Mark Krikorian. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

I, I have to say - and I have been doing this now for more than 12 

years, specifically in this job - and I have got to say, I have never 

heard someone on that side of the debate say, “Yes, this specific 

enforcement action” - and I am not talking about, you know, 

criminals, uh, you know, drug dealers or something - regular 

immigration violation - that “This specific enforcement action is 

OK.  This, I approve of.”  I have never found… 

KAREN NARASAKI 

Mark…  Mark, that is not… 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

I, I want to answer this question… 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 60. 

 

 

 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

…a single person ever… 

KAREN NARASAKI 

Mark, that is not true.  We supported… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Daniel Griswold. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

Yes.  Heather… 

KAREN NARASAKI 

…we supported comprehensive reform… 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

…Heather, I, I would… 

KAREN NARASAKI 

…which had… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Well, let…let Karen finish, and then Daniel. 

KAREN NARASAKI 

Yeah.  And which had tough employer standards… 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

I am talking about actual enforcement, not the… 

KAREN NARASAKI 

…that they were done reasonably. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

…not promises of future enforcement.  Is there anything that’s 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 61. 

 

 

 

ever happened - any enforcement action in the past say 20 years 

- that’s, that anyone on your side would be able to say, “Yeah OK, 

that’s good enforcement.  That, I am all for.” 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

All right. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

Never.  I have never heard a single one. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

All right.  And I would… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Daniel. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

…I would favor enforcement, if we had a law that was… 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

And who doesn’t?  I am very interested… 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

…if we had a law that was enforceable, and we weren’t throwing 

money down a rathole, which is what we are doing now.  And 

until recently… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

All right. 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

But it is enforceable… 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 62. 

 

 

 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Hold on, hold on one second. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

But isn’t it interesting… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Let’s focus on the specific question.  Is there any…?  And go 

down the, the, the, the three of you here on this side - Karen, 

Enrique and Daniel.  Is there any enforcement that you would 

consider to be “good” enforcement, in terms of immigration?  Not, 

not so much the wage and hour issues that you were talking 

about - and I take your point.  Uh, any enforcement of 

immigration laws that you would consider to be rational and not 

“money down a rathole”?  Daniel Griswold. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

Well, one, the law has to be rational.  And our law is irrational.  

And we have two very different views here… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Give me a rational law.  [LAUGHTER] 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

A rational law recognizes the reality of the U.S. economy.  We 

need these workers.  We are better off with these workers.  The 

reason half a million come a year - and not two and a half million 

but just half a million - is that’s about the demand of our 

economy.  If we had a law that reflected our needs as an 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 63. 

 

 

 

economy, our values as a nation, you would not have, uh, people 

coming across the border just to work.  So… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

So in that case, the regulation would be…  If, if, if, you know, 

Burger King here in, uh, you know, uh, Austin, Texas can 

guarantee you a job, you get a visa. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

Yes. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

And if…  And if there is no job for you, you can’t just show up on 

a street corner? 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

Right.  And that would be… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

And that would be a law that you would support… 

VERNON BRIGGS 

Whatever happens in the market.  And the wagering. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

And they, and they don’t come, if there is not a job.  And it’s very 

expensive to come here and not have a job and hang around.  In 

the 1950s, we dramatically increased the number of visas.  Illegal 

immigration dropped by 95 percent.  That’s our vision.  It’s a 

system that worked in the past.  It’ll work in the future.  And they 

are asking you to buy a pig in a poke.  “This time, if we just 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 64. 

 

 

 

spend enough money, if we just station enough agents on the 

border, if we just raid enough chickens…” 

VERNON BRIGGS 

And that’s absolutely false.  So you can’t use false statements… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Vernon… 

VERNON BRIGGS 

And you can’t just lie to people… 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

“And, and the discount…” 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Vernon Briggs. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

“And the discount stores.  It’ll, it’ll work this time.” 

VERNON BRIGGS 

And the reason…  The reason that it…that illegal immigration 

failed during the 1950s was because we had this awful program 

called Operation Wetback in the early ‘50s, which was a massive 

roundup - of which nobody would defend on this side of, uh, of 

the, of the borders.  And that we had a large number of illegal 

immigrants.  When that program ended, because of the massive 

violation of civil rights, illegal immigration went down.  And it 

wasn’t because we had…we introduced more visas. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 65. 

 

 

 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

Well, illegal immigration… 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

In other words, you are going to acquire… 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

And it started going up, after the, the ‘60s. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

Your view requires massive roundups.  And I’d actually like to 

know, from Enrique and Karen, do they support…? 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

We do. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

…another Bracero program?  Because that’s what he is talking 

about. 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

These, these are… 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

Roundup guest workers. 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

Using that terminology, like Operation Wetback, actually 

deported a lot of U.S. citizens as well. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

That’s right. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 66. 

 

 

 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

If you were Mexican, whether you were born in the United States 

or not, you were deported.  And we have somebody here whose, 

whose, uh, Mom was in a detention facility during the Second 

World War.  So we cannot accept this type of, of, of, of a situation 

at all.  And, and the guest worker program… 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

Well, that’s what the program is calling for… 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

When was the last time…? 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

That’s what the program is calling for… 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

When was the last time you had a guest in your house and you 

said, “Now I want you to clean the bathroom and mow my lawn”?  

Either you are a “guest,” or you are a worker.  So we need to have 

some sort of a humane program.  [LAUGHTER]  We need to have 

some sort of a humane program which addresses this issue.  

Another thing that was mentioned about Mexico.  It, it is true.  

We don’t have a border patrol, but the military is down in the 

southern border, partially funded by the United States, because 

they are trying to stop the flow right down there, be…before they 

get into, uh, Mexico.  And it’s very important to note, that if the 

wall had been built from the Pacific Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 67. 

 

 

 

on September 10th…September 11th would have happened 

exactly the same way.  One of the solutions that we should be 

doing is, is working with Mexico, creating bridges of 

communication, and not triple fences of separation.  We know 

people who have come from the north, from Canada.  Yet the 

National Guard, the wall, the Minutemen, they are on the 

southern border.  So we need to be working…  And I don’t want a 

wall up in the north, I don’t want a wall in the south.  We need to 

be working with our neighbors, and treating them as neighbors, 

not as enemies.  And that’s one of the things that we are looking 

for.  Look at the European common Union, how they have gotten 

together and improved the economy of all of the countries.  A 

rising tide raises all, all, all ships.  And we need to do the same 

thing in helping… 

VERNON BRIGGS 

By enforcing the immigration law along the border. 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

…in helping Latin America.  And we send billions to the Middle 

East, and only millions to Latin America.  Help Mexico and the 

other countries in Latin America develop, and the people will 

stay.  We are still gonna need immigrants here, though.  We are 

still gonna need it. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

All right. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 68. 

 

 

 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

But let’s think about it intelligently.  Not with all this rhetoric.  

Not with laughing about people dying at the border.  I am the 

only one that’s here that’s at the border every day.  Has seen 

dead bodies out there.  Has picked them up.  This is no laughing 

matter.  Our people are dying.  It’s inhumane.  If the world…  The 

world is watching us. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

OK. 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

And they are saying, “How could this country allow them to build 

this wall, and attack a community in the land of the free.” 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Enrique Morones, thank you very much. 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

But let me… 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

But wait… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

I want to take another question from the audience.  Uh, Judith 

Zucker, I believe, on the right side, Row H.  Could you stand, 

please?  Judith?  OK.  Yes, please.  State your question.  And, 

uh, direct it to who you would wish to answer it, please. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 69. 

 

 

 

JUDITH ZUCKER 

 [OFF MIC]  And I believe I asked, uh, a question.  _____ in this 

era of Homeland Security, when we are supposed to be keeping 

our country safe.  Why is it that we have this immigration issue 

at such an extreme, uh, level at this point?  And the irony is very 

strange to me. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

Could I take a whack at that? 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Please.  Go ahead. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

Yeah, um… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Mark Krikorian. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

The, the…  The reason immigration policy is relevant to security 

now, is not just some opportunistic thing.  “Well, 9/11 was a big 

deal, so let’s concoct some rationale based on ‘security’ to reduce 

immigration.”  Kind of like these lobbyists for “farm subsidies” 

talk about “food security.”  You know, “The, uh, uh, the terrorists 

are gonna…are, are trying to attack us, so we need subsidies for 

food security.”  No, this is an integral…  There is…there is a 

reason that immigration policy and security are related.  Uh, 

years ago, World War II, they talked about “the homefront.”  That 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 70. 

 

 

 

was part of the government’s propaganda at the time, and I use 

that in a positive term…way.  Um, and it was designed really…  

The, the use of the term “homefront” was to get people motivated 

to, you know, recycle their old tires and not grumble too much 

about butter rationing.  But it wasn’t a real “front”;  it was a 

metaphor.  Today, the homefront is not a metaphor anymore, as 

obviously we all know - it’s the actual front.  Because of modern 

technology, modern transportation and communications and 

weapons technology, the homefront is the real front.  And the 

number one defensive tool we have - not “offensive” tool, but 

“defensive” tool - is immigration control.  And the fact that we 

have enormous levels of, uh, illegal immigration.  Half of new 

immigration, mind you, each year’s…  Half of each year’s 

immigration is illegal now.  There is 800,000 illegal aliens settled 

here each year, plus 800,000 new legal immigrants coming from 

abroad.  The fact that we permit this is an enormous 

vulnerability.  Because any system that the Mexican illegal 

busboy can get through is something that a terrorist can get 

through. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

All right, Mark.  Let’s…let’s focus on this… 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

And the fact is that all of our borders have been used by 

terrorists. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 71. 

 

 

 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Let’s focus on that for just a second.  I mean, Judith raises a 

point that sounds actually quite alarming.  And you make the 

point that if it’s easy to walk into the United States, uh, under 

whatever pretense you want, um, that we are less secure.  But 

what is the evidence that changing immigration policy will make 

us more secure?  What is the specific threat that will be 

eliminated?  And, and how does it specifically manifest itself in 

the immigrant population?  That I haven’t heard. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

Sure.  Now, good question.  Um, we looked actually, uh, 

after…after 9/11, we looked at the 48 al-Qaeda related terrorists 

who had either committed criminal acts or who had been 

arrested before they were able to commit their crimes, starting 

with the first World Trade Center attack, finishing with 9/11.  

And there were a lot in between - either smaller attacks, or 

conspiracies - that were, um, interrupted.  And the majority of 

those people committed immigration violations.  The fact is that a 

more, uh, vigorous, consistent, comprehensive enforcement of 

the immigration laws would have exposed probably - as far as we 

can tell - every single major terrorist conspiracy, uh, against the 

United States.  Even when you look at 9/11.  The fact is that, 

four of the hijackers were - in some form or another - illegal 

aliens.  And one of them came to study English, and then just 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 72. 

 

 

 

never showed up, and there was no way for us to know.  Uh, a 

couple had overstayed.  One had overstayed earlier, and 

shouldn’t have been allowed back in but was.  Others…  One of 

them was an illegal alien and was stopped by the police for 

driving - whatever it was - 95 miles an hour in a 50 mile an hour 

zone and nobody checked whether he was legal or illegal.  So 

that…  The fact is that, every major terrorist, uh, uh, conspiracy 

in the United States - every effort at attacking the United States 

has involved - must necessarily involve immigration law.  And 

has - almost inevitably, and almost always will involve - violations 

of immigration law… 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

John… 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

…that if we detect… 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

…can I respond to that? 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

…we can unravel… 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

It’s a bunch of nonsense. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Thank you, Mark Krikorian. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 73. 

 

 

 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

Who is “they”? 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Dan Griswold. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

Who is “they”?  They were born and raised right here… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Dan…  And we’ll get a response from Dan Griswold.  And then 

you, Enrique. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

The last time I checked, not one of those 48 terrorists was a 

Mexican.  They weren’t from Central America, they were from a 

particular part of the world, for historical reasons… 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

Oh, so we discovered the Arabs first.  OK. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

…and for historical reasons.  Uh, they were not from Central 

America.  None of them snuck across the Mexican border to get 

into the United States, and yet that was where we were obsessed 

with our resources.  So we were basically guarding our back 

door, while the terrorists waltzed in through JFK through the 

front door.  It’s not an immigration problem.  You know, every 

day…  Today was a typical day.  One million people entered the 

United States.  About a million foreigners a day enter the United 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 74. 

 

 

 

States legally.  The vast majority of them turn around and go 

home within 30 days or 60 days.  That’s our vulnerability.  And 

yet, we are sending these resources down there to catch 

dishwashers and roofers and people who have no criminal 

intentions, no criminal records.  They just want to come here and 

work.  And you talked about “interior enforcement.”  Uh, again, 

what in the world are we spending all these resources going after 

businesses and peaceful, normal workers, when the real 

vulnerability are bridges and nuclear power plants and other 

infrastructure?  That’ why the raids tailed off so much in 2003, it 

was because we were trying to guard our critical infrastructure.   

Well, I like McDonald’s, but it’s not critical infrastructure.  If they 

want to hire a worker, I think they should be able to do, and we 

should create that legal channel.  If we had a sensible legalization 

program, all these problems would be more manageable.  We 

would be more secure, if our Homeland Security Department was 

going after the real criminals and terrorists… 

VERNON BRIGGS 

Oh, you want to abolish all employer sanctions.  That’s all you 

want to do. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

…and not going after [UNCLEAR] workers. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Vernon Briggs. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 75. 

 

 

 

VERNON BRIGGS 

That’s what…that’s what you are saying.  Uh, uh, uh, the reason 

we have these, these job sites - and these, these roundups and 

what have you - is because we have got a law that says they are 

not supposed to be there.  And there are people that it have hurt.  

There are low wage workers - of all races and ethnic groups.  I am 

not just concerned about Mexicans.  I am concerned about 

people of all races - who are both illegal immigrants and those 

who are hurt in this country [APPLAUSE] by the…by illegal 

immigration. 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

You cannot…  You cannot…  It was Martin Luther King that said, 

“You cannot legislate morality.”  And once again, they are…they 

are using fear tactics - tactics of fear.  As, as, uh, it was 

mentioned by Daniel - none of those people were from Latin 

America.  Timothy McVeigh was born and raised in the United 

States.  And there is countless other people - within this country 

- that have committed terrorist acts.  Terrorism doesn’t come 

from a country;  it comes from an ideology.  And it comes from 

the policies that has been exhibited - especially these last few 

years - in many cases, by this country…and people are reacting 

to it.  Nobody supports terrorism in general.  Nobody.  We want to 

stop it.  It’s horrible. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 76. 

 

 

 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

We want to stop it coming.  Is that it, Enrique? 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

It’s horrible what’s going on.  But look at what happened with the 

Canadian border - with the, uh, the people that…  The 

Millennium Bomber.  People that…  Toronto, a terrorist cell.  

These types of situations…  We should be working with our 

neighboring countries, and intelligence - gathering an 

intelligence, working together.  That’s the way that we solve these 

issues.  Just stop blaming…  Continuously they are blaming one 

country - Mexico.  It’s not Mexico.  It’s, it’s, it’s, it’s an ideology.  

And let’s start working together.  It’s very important that we don’t 

succumb to these scare tactics… 

VERNON BRIGGS 

The reason…  And that’s why you won’t address the question of 

undocumented workers. 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

…and, and, and, and, and…  What they are trying to do, is use 

the politics of fear. 

VERNON BRIGGS 

No.  If, if you want… 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

And many people in this audience are familiar with the politics of 

fear.  If you look back in your history, the politics of, of fear was, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 77. 

 

 

 

uh, uh, one of the horriblest, uh, times in our history;  with the 

annihilation of so many different people… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

All right, Enrique.  I want to move to one, because we are 

running… 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

And I think that right now… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

…and we are running short on time here, and I want to get at 

least another… 

KAREN NARASAKI 

But I…  Actually, I wouldn’t mind, but I… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

OK.  Go ahead, Karen.  [LAUGHS]  Go ahead.  Karen Narasaki. 

KAREN NARASAKI 

And I actually want to, uh, respond to the professor’s question 

and your earlier question, and that is, uh…  In fact, there are 

some enforcement that we support.  We just want it to work.  And 

so, for example… 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

Which? 

KAREN NARASAKI 

If I could finish.  For example, uh, you know, it…  If we are going 

to have an employer system, uh, of checking - that’s great.  But 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 78. 

 

 

 

we need to have the database then be accurate.  Because it’s a 

big thing not to be able to get a job, because somebody has 

fingered you.  And if anybody has tried to go straighten out 

something with the government, you know it’s not [LAUGHS] an 

easy task.  So we just want to have a system that’s gonna work, 

where people have the right to challenge.  Where the government 

has an obligation to fix its database.  Where employers…  Where 

the sanctions are not so high, that employers are just going to 

randomly start to racial profile as a way to avoid the problem.  

And let me say.  I mean, one of the things about driver’s licenses.  

California passed a law a while ago, saying we are not gonna give, 

uh, driver’s licenses to undocumented.  Well, they started 

denying licenses to Puerto Ricans, because the people working at 

the DMV didn’t understand who the Puerto Ricans were.  They 

thought - since they couldn’t produce a, um, a green card - that 

they were illegally here.  We cannot put those kinds of 

decisions…at that level.  We need to have a more professional 

border enforcement.  And we need more people.  We need better 

training.  Border enforcement is great, and let’s have a citizens 

commission to make sure it’s done humanely, and to make sure 

that, that, uh, people are being held accountable for how they 

act. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

All right. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 79. 

 

 

 

VERNON BRIGGS 

But the bottom line, illegal immigrants don’t work.  That’s, 

that’s…that should be the principle.  And if you would say that, I 

would go along with everything you said.  But the bottom line of 

employer sanctions must be…  What we are saying is…that illegal 

immigrants…do not work in the United States.  That’s the law of 

the United States… since 1986… 

KAREN NARASAKI 

But can I tell you? 

VERNON BRIGGS 

…because they don’t work. 

KAREN NARASAKI 

You, you were right…  And you were right, that employer 

sanctions did not work in the ‘90s.  Because there was a wink 

and a nod about really employers wanting them, and issues.  

Well, you know, the immigrant community has come to grips with 

that.  And there was very hard negotiations between…with labor 

and Chamber of Commerce and businesses…that was brokered 

by Senator Obama…to come up with a system that works.  That’s 

all people are asking for. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

All right.  And we are reaching a… 

KAREN NARASAKI 

We are not saying “no enforcement.” 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 80. 

 

 

 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

…we are reaching a passionate point here in the question and 

answer.  And I want to channel some of those passions into the 

summing up remarks of all of the, uh, panelists, who are going to 

give their final pitch for and against the resolution.  Speaking 

now.  And of course, remember, the margin of victory for the 

resolution in the vote before the debate…  And we will have a 

chance to re-visit that vote at the conclusion of the final sum-up.  

But to conclude in the final rebuttal, against the resolution, 

Daniel Griswold will speak first. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

And those workers who come here illegally are not bad people.  

They are not “criminals” in the usual sense of the word.  They are 

good, decent, hard-working family people who have run afoul of a 

very bad law that needs to be changed.  You know, the, uh, the 

proposition here about “welcoming illegal immigrants.”  Some 

welcome.  [LAUGHS]  If you want to come here, you have to pay 

a, a smuggler, a coyote, $2,000, risk your life in the desert, and 

sometimes not make it and die a terrible death.  Live a shadow 

existence here.  Not having full employment opportunities.  Not 

being able to go home and visit your family, uh, on holiday, 

because you may not get back into the country.  Uh, that isn’t 

“welcoming” them.  And these people may be low skilled, but they 

are not dumb.  They’ll respond to incentives.  If we give them an 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 81. 

 

 

 

alternative - a legal alternative to the current dysfunctional 

system - I think they’ll obey the law and enter the country legally, 

as they did in the 1950s when we offered sufficient number of, 

uh, the Bursaro visas.  Allow them to come in in a safe, orderly… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

One. 

DANIEL GRISWOLD 

…legal way, through our normal ports of entry, to assume all the 

responsibilities and privileges of working in our above ground 

economy.  They love their country.  Believe it or not, not 

everybody in the world wants to live in America.  In fact, most 

people don’t.  They love their country, they love their culture and 

their family, and they want to stay home.  And traditionally, back 

when we had a kind of, uh, “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy of 

immigration for Mexico - most of them went back home, because 

that’s where their family is, and that’s where they want to go.  

Right now, we have a broken law that needs to be changed.  I 

think we should welcome more legal immigrants, and that’s why I 

urge to vote against this resolution. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Daniel Griswold, thank you very much, speaking against the 

resolution.  Now, to speak for the resolution, in final rebuttal, 

Heather Mac Donald. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 82. 

 

 

 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

Well, we have heard, I think, a lot of, uh, sleight of hand by the 

opposing team, which is to conflate illegal immigration and legal 

immigration.  They basically have been debating a proposition 

that is not before us tonight, which is - we should continue 

welcoming legal immigration.  All of our team member is for that.  

We agree that legal immigration is part of this country’s history.  

Uh, it is appropriate.  It is, uh…it brings values.  But, but one of 

the values that this country stands for, is the rule of law.  Uh, if 

we continue to wink at illegal immigration, I think that we are 

cutting away at the fabric of what makes this country great.  

There is nothing “inhumane” about enforcing laws in a 

color-blind, fair manner.  We have yet to do that.  Uh, but it is 

not inherently… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

One. 

HEATHER MAC DONALD 

…“inhumane” to have an immigration law.  We haven’t tried it.  

Uh, when we start, we will be sending a message to people that it 

is not right to come here.  We are working [LAUGHS] with Mexico.  

Uh, we are giving them aid.  We are working on the border.  They 

have a responsibility.  Other countries have a responsibility, it 

seems to me, to, to, to do something about their own economies, 

uh, which we are trying to help them with, and to prevent their 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 83. 

 

 

 

citizens from trying to come into this country illegally.  Uh, again, 

we are a great country, and part of that is the rule of law.  And 

that currently, the system is broken.  The thing to do is to start 

fixing it, by enforcing it.  Thank you. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Speaking for the resolution, Heather Mac Donald.  [APPLAUSE]  

Now to speak against the resolution, in final rebuttal, Karen 

Narasaki. 

KAREN NARASAKI 

All we are trying to debate tonight is, what kind of country do we 

want to be?  How do we want to enforce these laws?  

Restrictionists, for example, object to allowing undocumented 

immigrants to have bank accounts and pay taxes.  They say 

“that’s welcoming. ”  Yet, without bank accounts, these 

immigrants are vulnerable to criminals who know to rob their 

businesses or invade their homes because they know they will 

find a lot of cash.  And how does it help Americans to stop 

immigrants from being able to pay taxes to help cover their share 

of the cost of building roads or running schools?  Isn’t that one of 

the reasons restrictions give for what they feel is unfair about 

undocumented immigrants in the first place?  Which, by the way, 

do pay taxes.  And in fact, in a recent study that was done on 

Long Island, for example, immigrants were paying much more of 

their share of taxes than they were actually using as benefits.  So 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 84. 

 

 

 

let’s jettison the old way of thinking, because it really hasn’t 

served our country well.  Let’s ask ourselves… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

One. 

KAREN NARASAKI 

…do we want to be a country where we turn teachers and 

co-workers, ministers and nurses and neighbors into immigration 

police?  Or one where we have sense… sensible, realistic 

immigration flows, with a well-trained border enforcement 

agency, who are held accountable for following their own laws?  

One that continues to hold agencies accountable for following the 

rules when they make decisions about people’s lives, or one that 

illuminates the systems of checks and balances and sacrifices 

due process along the way?  If you vote for our side, it’s because 

you believe that it’s time for us to stop scapegoating immigrants, 

and instead focus on how do we fix the real problems?  How do 

we fix the push that pushes immigrants here?  And what do we 

do with immigrants once they are here, to make sure that our 

communities are healthy and thriving, and that we continue to be 

able to compete well in the global marketplace.  Thank you. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Thank you.  Karen Narasaki [APPLAUSE] speaking against the 

resolution.  Now to speak for the resolution, in final rebuttal, 

Vernon Briggs. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 85. 

 

 

 

VERNON BRIGGS 

Uh, the current situation we have, of massive user immigration 

system, breeds widespread cynicism throughout the country by 

illegals and by citizens about what are American values?  Illegal 

immigrants know they are exploited, but they have no choice but 

to take the jobs that are offered to them;  they are still better 

what they had where they came from.  Citizens are appalled with 

the lack of concern by their own government… country, uh, on 

the…about the unfairness of the competition that low wage 

workers are confronting with the presence of illegal immigrations.  

Perversely, we has set up a system, where those lawyers - uh, 

sorry - where those employers who try to follow the immigration, 

uh, laws of the United States are, are…or who, uh, or law… are 

put at a competitive disadvantage by firms that are allowed to 

violate the laws and can under, uh, uh…underbid them and 

under…and undersell them in the labor market.  Currently, by 

the way, because we don’t enforce our immigration laws, we are, 

we are basically, well, rewarding law breaking…and, uh, and 

those who follow the law, they are actually punished.  Many years 

ago, the famous CBS correspondent Edward R. Murrow said, 

“The duty of journalists is to separate slogans from policies.” 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

One. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 86. 

 

 

 

VERNON BRIGGS 

I think that’s the duty of scholars also.  Tonight, we have heard a 

lot of slogans from the other side, but no policies.  Our position is 

one of clear policy - not slogans about “scapegoating” and “nation 

of immigrations” and “who we are as Americans” and all that.  We 

are talking basically here about policy.  That if we could…if we 

could actually begin to enforce our immigration policies, we could 

then turn to the real issues of what’s pushing people out of these 

countries, that I would love to discuss.  And those are the big 

issues.  But we can’t get to those issues - human rights 

violations, uh, population pressures, unfair trade policies and all 

the rest of them - because the system is so out of kilter, because 

we don’t enforce our immigration laws.  We desperately need to 

do so.  The Jordan Commission said, the credibility of the 

immigration policy can be measured by a simple yardstick.  Do 

people who get in, uh - who should get in, do get in?  The people 

who should not get in are kept out.  And the people who are 

deportable - are required to leave.  That’s Barbara Jordan.  No 

racist.  And it can’t be said any clearer.  [APPLAUSE] 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Thank you, Vernon Briggs.  Before our last two speakers, let me 

remind you of the motion.  Let’s Stop Welcoming Undocumented 

Immigrants.  Our final speaker, against the motion, Enrique 

Morones. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 87. 

 

 

 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

Well, thank you all very much.  And I want to pass on my, my 

love and my, uh, support to, uh, the fact that, that we are all here 

today.  And, and I appreciate the fact that we would going to be 

able to debate this.  Remember that, um…  What right do we 

have to deny anybody to have a better life?  What right do we 

have?  We want a…  We have a solution that six…  Like, three 

and a half million people demonstrated when they marched in 

the streets last spring.  Like, 65 percent of the country, according 

to a Gallup Poll, supports it.  It’s comprehensive and humane 

immigration reform.  I, I, I keep on repeating this.  Many of you, 

in your history, are familiar with the politics of hate.  Shouldn’t 

somebody have stepped in and said, “We have got to stop this?”  

Love is in action, and not in words.  It’s important that we go 

and, and demonstrate the best of America.  The best of America - 

the diversity.  The whole world used to hold us up and look at us 

and say, “That’s what we strive to be.”  That’s not taking place 

right now.  We want to get back to that.  And we can.  Sleight of 

hand.  Well, the sources that I have are Business Week, the Wall 

Street Journal, the Good Book.  And I am talking about serious… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

One. 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

…serious, uh, documentation, and not using this type of rhetoric, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 88. 

 

 

 

this type of dehumanizing language, which only promotes the 

politics of fear.  We want to have the rule of law.  I believe in a, in 

a law from, uh, above - but I also believe in the laws of a country.  

But remember, sometimes laws are wrong.  And we had slaves in 

this country, and that was a law.  Women could not vote, that 

was a law.  Child labor, that was a law.  Somebody had to stand 

up and say, “This is wrong.”  And that’s why it’s important that 

you vote against this motion.  It’s wrong what is taking place.  

And we have a lot of work to do.  There is not easy solutions.  But 

you have got to look at yourself in the mirror and say, “Hey, I did 

the right thing.”  When your grandkids ask you, “What did you do 

when all those people were dying, when the families were being 

raided, what did you do?  Did you do the right thing?”  And let’s 

build a better America.  And it’s the immigrants that build a 

better America.  Give those people a humane way in which to 

enter, and not die at the border - as two people per day are dying.  

Two people died today.  We cannot continue to allow this to 

happen.  We have a lot of work to do - a lot of work to do within 

this country.  It’s a great and generous country. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Enrique Morones… 

ENRIQUE MORONES 

Let’s practice what we preach. 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 89. 

 

 

 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

…speaking against the motion.  Thank you very much.  

[APPLAUSE]  Our final speaker, in rebuttal, for the motion, Mark 

Krikorian. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

And I am a bad person.  [LAUGHTER]  I would love to debate 

what the level of legal immigration should be, how we should 

organize it, who we should pick, who we should not.  In fact, I 

have a book coming out in the summer that, uh, addresses that 

very question [LAUGHTER] from Sentinel, available in July.  

[LAUGHTER]  Um, but that’s… 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

But you are a bad person.  [LAUGHTER] 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

 [LAUGHS]  That’s not the debate before us, though.  The 

question really we are facing, for our purposes tonight is, are we 

willing to enforce the law?  We have a heard a lot of “if’s” and 

“would’s” and “should’s” and “need to’s” from the other side 

about enforcement.  But I think we all understand that if the 

Bush amnesty bill that was debated in the Senate this summer 

had passed, that, um, the commitment to enforcement would last 

only until the last illegal alien in line got his green card - at which 

point it would just, like in 1986, evaporate.  And a few years after 

that… 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 90. 

 

 

 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

One. 

MARK KRIKORIAN 

…we would have a burgeoning illegal population, because the 

market does not determine illegal immigration - our policies do, 

in large part - and we would have the same debate, saying “We 

need to have realistic laws that legalize all the next batch of 

illegal immigrants.”  We need to decide - are we willing to enforce 

the borders of the United States and the laws determined by the 

American people through their elected representatives - or do we 

want, in effect, to abolish American sovereignty and embrace the, 

say, E.U. or other, uh, model that the other side has used…where 

we, the American people, no longer decide what our immigration 

policy is. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

Thank you, Mark Krikorian.  [APPLAUSE]  It is now time to vote.  

The motion before the House:  Let’s Stop Welcoming 

Undocumented Immigrants.  Once again, pick up the keypad 

attached to the left armrest on your seat.  And after my prompt, 

press “1” if you are for the motion, “2” if you are against the 

motion, or “3” if you are undecided.  All right.  Please cast your 

vote now.  Thank you, voters.  Thank you, audience.  And I want 

to thank the debaters and the audience for their good work.  This 

is a terrific discussion.  [APPLAUSE]  Much, much more to 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 91. 

 

 

 

discuss.  Before I announce the results of the audience vote, I 

want to, uh, take care of just a few things up here.  The next 

Intelligence Squared U.S. debate will be on Tuesday, October 

30th, right here at Asia Society and Museum.  The motion to be 

debated at that time is - is Russia…?  “Russia is becoming our 

enemy again.”  That’s the motion.  And it will be moderated by 

the Economist’s Edward Lucas.  The panelists for the next debate 

are:  For the motion, Staff Journalist in Residence at the 

Foundation for Defense of Democracy’s Claudia Rosett;  Foreign 

Affairs columnist for the Wall Street Journal Bret Stephens;  and 

the Annenberg Chair in International Communication at the 

Institute for World Politics, J. Michael Waller.  Again the motion 

will be speaking:  Professor of International Affairs at the New 

School, Nina Khrushcheva;  Professor of Political Science at 

Columbia University Robert Legvold;  and Vice President for 

Studies of Russia, China and Eurasia at the Carnegie 

Endowment for International Peace, Mark Medish.  I know that 

many of you that were here tonight will be very interested in that 

debate, and please join us for that.  An edited version of tonight’s 

Intelligence Squared U.S. debate can be heard locally on 

WNYC-AM 820, on Sunday, October 21st, at 8:00 P.M.  Please 

check your local NPR member station listings for the dates and 

times of broadcast outside of New York City.  Mark, you didn’t 

even let me, and I had to plug all ready for you.  And copies of, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 

PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation-Intelligence SquaredUS-Undocumented Immigrants Page 92. 

 

 

 

uh, books of the panelists…  Vernon Briggs’ book Mass 

Immigration in the National Interest, Heather Mac Donald’s 

[LAUGHS] The Immigration Solution, are on sale upstairs in the 

lobby.  And you can also purchase DVD’s from previous debates 

here tonight, or from the Intelligence Squared U.S. website.  And 

now, the debate results.  After our debaters did their best to sway 

you, you voted…  Uh, before the debate, you voted 42 percent for.  

After the debate, 60 percent for the motion.  [APPLAUSE]  Before 

the debate, 34 percent against the motion.  After the debate, 37 

percent against the motion.  Before the debate, 24 percent of you 

were undecided.  After the debate, 3 percent were undecided.  

Congratulations to those supporting the resolution.  [APPLAUSE] 

VERNON BRIGGS 

Yeah, and thank you. 

JOHN HOCKENBERRY 

The House is adjourned.  Thank you very much.  I am John 

Hockenberry.  

[END OF TAPE] 


