
 
MEDIA TRANSCRIPTS, INC. 
41 WEST 83rd STREET  NEW YORK, N.Y.  10024   (212)  362-1481 

 
FOR Rosenkranz Foundation 

590 Madison Avenue, 30th Floor 
New York, NY 10022 

DATE 9/27/06 

PROGRAM “Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
“We must tolerate a nuclear Iran” 
  

BGT NO.  . 

 

ROBERT ROSENKRANZ 
 Good evening, everyone, and welcome.  I’m Robert Rosenkranz, 

chairman of Intelligence Squared U.S. Debate Forum, which is an 

initiative of the Rosenkranz Foundation.  It’s a very special 

pleasure for me to welcome you today to our inaugural debate of 

our inaugural season.  With this series of live debates, and with 

our national radio audience, we’re pursuing a lofty and ambitious 

goal.  We’re trying to raise the level of public discourse in 

American life.  We see a Congress that’s mired in partisan rancor, 

we see much of the media increasingly ideological.  We see policy 

intellectuals in the think-tank world preaching to their respective 

choirs, and the discussion of contentious policy issues 

everywhere, dominated by intense emotions, rather than by facts 

and reasoned analysis.   But Intelligence Squared is not about the 

search for bland middle ground.  Rather, we want to encourage 

each side of an argument to sharpen its own thinking by listening 

to opposing views, and responding to inconvenient facts.  We 

want our audience, who voted on tonight’s resolution coming in, 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 2. 

to vote again after hearing the debate.   As our great Judge Pierre 

LeBeau said, “You know you have a mind, when you change it.”   

[LAUGHTER]   

 

 Whether or not you change your mind, I hope you’ll come away 

with the recognition that there is an intellectually respectable 

position on the other side.   For that is the real point of our 

initiative.  We want to promote a civil society in America that is 

truly civil—where we increase our respect for opposing views, we 

reduce our anger and emotion, and we call on the best within 

ourselves, as we confront the challenging issues of our day.   

We’re thrilled that WNYC is recording our series of debates, and 

that through National Public Radio, you’ll be able to hear this 

debate in most of the major cities across the country on local NPR 

stations.  My wife Alexandra Munroe commissioned the study 

that was the first concrete step in this initiative, and she has 

made invaluable contributions every step of the way.    

 

 We value the sponsorship of the Times of London, their support, 

and indeed the excellence of the debates themselves is part of a 

team effort.  I want to especially thank our moderator Robert 

Siegel, the voice of “All Things Considered,” and the extraordinary 

group of panelists who are the true stars of tonight’s event.   But 

one individual merits special acknowledgement—our executive 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 3. 

producer, Dana Wolfe, a former “ABC News Nightline” producer 

who brought extraordinary determination, intelligence, and 

experience to this project.  Thank you, Dana.  [APPLAUSE]  I’d 

like to close by quoting two political leaders, one American, one 

British.  Al Gore, at the Clinton Global Initiative last week, 

speaking on the subject of global warming as a crisis, said, “The 

debate is over.”   And now, Margaret Thatcher.  “I love argument.  

I love debate.  I don’t expect anyone to just sit there and agree 

with me.  that’s not their job.”  Well, at the risk of showing my 

own partisanship, I’d like to declare a victory for Britain.  

[LAUGHTER]    

 

 Of course Oxford-style debate is a long and vigorous tradition in 

Britain, and Intelligence Squared was founded in London, where 

it’s an esteemed institution and a major success.  There it 

attracts a live audience of 800 of London’s most influential 

figures.   I’m honored to welcome the founders, media 

entrepreneurs Jeremy O’Grady, and John Gordon, and pass the 

microphone over to John, who will share his thoughts and 

introduce our moderator for the evening. 

[APPLAUSE]   

JOHN GORDON 
Thank you very much, Robert.  We’re absolutely delighted that 

Intelligence Squared has come to America thanks to the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 4. 

Rosenkranz Foundation.  It’s great for the baby that Jeremy 

O’Grady and I have been nurturing for 25 or more years and that 

we created four years ago has now come over the pond.   

]Intelligence Squared in London has really taken off.  Everyone 

there loves debate and even though it’s very much part of our 

tradition, it’s not very much a part of the tradition in London--

there isn’t any regular series of debates other than Intelligence 

Squared.   I hope this evening you’ll enjoy the two particular 

pleasures I think that we enjoy from the debate, one is that, this 

is probably the first time that you’ll have the opportunity to hear 

oratory.  I mean there is very seldom—few outlets where you can 

hear somebody speaking for eight or nine minutes in trying to 

persuade you to vote for or against a particular motion.  And I 

think the other great sort of pleasure of debate, which again I’m 

sure you’ll experience this evening—particularly if you’re 

undecided as to the motion—is the great pleasure of hearing the 

proposer arguing the motion, agreeing with them, and then eight 

minutes later actually agreeing with the other side.  And it’s that 

intellectual ping-pong that is particularly exciting.    

 

We’ve been slightly surprised by the enormous take-up of 

Intelligence Squared, there’s been a vast amount of interest from 

companies around the world interviewing us, writing articles 

about it.  It’s almost sort of emblematic of the stereotypes of 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 5. 

various countries, for example the French who have written about 

it and interviewed us, are particularly surprised by the fact that 

the speakers who are normally extremely rude to each other in 

English debate end up going out to dinner with each other.  

[LAUGHTER]   The Germans who’ve interviewed us twice and 

written an article in Der Spiegel, were actually surprised by 

debate, full stop.  [LAUGHTER]  As a consensual society they’ve 

just never really sort of experienced the idea of debate.  And the 

Japanese, with whom we did an interview on Tokyo FM very 

recently, a live interview to 20 million people, in the course of the 

interview it was clear that they completely misunderstood what 

we were doing.  [LAUGHTER]   

 

They asked us, how many people have gotten married during the 

course of a meeting.  [LAUGHTER]  They rather thought we were 

a dating agency.  [LAUGHTER]  So we’re rather curious to see 

how you are going to respond to this very quintessential British 

sport of adversarial debate.  I’d like now to hand over the 

microphone to our very distinguished moderator this evening, 

Robert Siegel.  Robert is a senior host of National Public Radio’s 

award-winning evening news magazine, “All Things Considered.”   

He got started in radio news when he was a college freshman in 

1964, and he’s still at it.  As a host, Robert has reported from 

Europe, the Middle East and all over the United States.  He 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 6. 

served for four years as director of NPR’s news and information 

department.  I’m now very pleased to turn the evening over to 

Robert for the debate, “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran.”  Thank 

you.    

[APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Thank you, John Gordon, for your introduction, and I’d like to 

welcome all of you to the inaugural Intelligence Squared U.S. 

debate.  I’d like to begin with some housekeeping.  First the 

obligatory announcement at all public gatherings— could you 

please turn off your cell phones, pagers, PDA’s, things that beep, 

talking toys or whatever else you might have with you tonight, 

that might interrupt the debate.  Also, if you have something that 

you might be tempted to unwrap in the course of the evening, this 

is being recorded for broadcast in radio, and the sound of 

wrapping paper crinkling is often a substitute for crackling fire, 

or it was in the old days.  So please do the unwrapping now, 

before we begin.    

 

I’d like to explain the proceedings, what’s going to happen this 

evening.  First, the proposer of the motion will start by proposing 

that side of the argument, and the opposition will follow.  We will 

alternate from the pro to the con side, each presentation being 

eight minutes.   I’ll be the time cop, and I’ll give them two-minute 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 7. 

and one-minute warnings, and if they keep on talking, I’ll tell you 

to turn your cell phones back on and interrupt them.  

[LAUGHTER]  After all six speakers have spoken and finished, 

we’ll then have a question-and-answer session in which we will 

welcome your questions, and also your brief statements, and they 

will respond to you.  When that question-and-answer session is 

complete, each debater will make a final statement lasting no 

more than two minutes.  Now, during the closing statements we 

then come to this perforated ballot-ticket that you were given on 

the way in.    

 

You were asked as you entered whether you were for or against 

the motion or undecided, and once again we will ask you, after 

you’ve heard from all of our speakers, to vote again, and you will 

do that in a manner I’ll describe.  If you don’t have one of these 

now, we’ll take care of that when the time comes and the usher 

will provide you with a ballot.  Then after we’ve heard all the 

closing statements, we shall announce the results of both the poll 

that we took on the way in, and also the voting after you’ve heard 

these, what I hope will be very interesting and persuasive 

presentations.  I’d like to introduce our panel right now.  First, 

those who support and propose the notion that we must tolerate 

a nuclear Iran.  George Perkovich is a U.S. foreign policy expert 

and vice-president for studies at the Carnegie Endowment for 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 8. 

International Peace.  Welcome.  Karim Sadjadpour, formally 

based in Tehran, is a writer and Iran analyst for the International 

Crisis Group.  Sanam Vakil is assistant professor of Middle East 

Studies at Johns Hopkins University’s School of Advanced 

International Studies.  That’s the side that proposes the motion 

we’re going to hear debated.    

 

To my left this evening, are Patrick Clawson, who is an author 

and also deputy director at the Washington Institute for Near 

East Policy, Reuel Marc Gerecht, an expert in Middle East affairs, 

formerly with the CIA, currently a resident fellow at the American 

Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, and best-selling 

author and co-founder/editor of the Washington-based political 

magazine The Weekly Standard, William Kristol.  Bill Kristol 

rounds out our panel.   So let us start the debate, proposing the 

motion, “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran,” George Perkovich, 

please take the podium.     

GEORGE PERKOVICH 
[Thank you.  I’m intrigued by the “Dating Game” idea so maybe 

we can return to that in the question part.  It’s an evening event, 

everybody’s tired from work.  To judge the motion, “We must 

tolerate a nuclear Iran,” you must evaluate the alternatives to it.  

Ideally, the United States and other leading actors can prevent 

Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons.  Indeed, all six of us here 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 9. 

agree emphatically that the U.S. and the international community 

must do everything possible, and more than has been done 

already, to try to prevent this.  We all agree with that, we all work 

on that much of our time.  We can talk about some of the steps 

that that might entail, including the United States being willing to 

engage in direct negotiations with Iran if Iran is willing to do so, 

which is a big question.  We should talk about security 

guarantees to Iran, which Patrick has written about in the form 

of, “We will not attack you if you don’t attack us.”  We should 

right now be mustering Iran’s neighbors— perhaps secretly, some 

of it openly—into a much tighter, cohesive network to try to 

cooperate on intelligence, air monitoring, perhaps moving ballistic 

missile defenses into the region, to show Iran that its freedom of 

maneuver will be diminished if it moves forward with nuclear 

weapons.    

 

We have to be much more direct with President Putin in Russia.  

Russia is the biggest impediment of getting the Security Council 

to take strong actions, and we can talk about that later.  The 

general point is, prevention, all of us agree, is the best option.  

Yet prevention is not the proposition we’ve been asked to debate 

here tonight.  The question we are debating, is whether we can 

tolerate a nuclear Iran.  That question assumes that diplomacy 

has failed, and we’re on to other options.  Then we have to ask, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 10. 

well, what are the alternatives to tolerating an Iran that possesses 

nuclear weapons.  Well, one might say, well, we kill ourselves.  If 

we can’t tolerate, we kill ourselves.  That’s not a good option.   

 

The second option will be, well, we’ll kill all of them.  Make the 

problem go away.  Also not a good option, there are 74 million of 

them, three times the population of Iraq.  Even if somehow it were 

morally justifiable, it wouldn’t necessarily solve the problem.  The 

most feasible strategy that is the alternative, the most feasible 

strategy for not tolerating a nuclear Iran, is an attack—a 

combination of attack on its known nuclear facilities, on its air 

force and navy to try to prevent its capacity to retaliate 

immediately, and on the Revolutionary Guard, to try to hasten 

regime change.  This ought to be examined, and there are a long 

list of questions that arise from this.  But the key thing in terms 

of the motion before us is, that you should not assume that this 

is a question of will power.  In other words, if one says, “I will not 

tolerate a nuclear Iran,” that somehow that solves the problem, 

that the will power to act—meaning to conduct a war—somehow 

achieves the objective of eliminating Iran’s nuclear capability.    

 

There’s no reason actually to conclude that it would—that even if 

you had the will, you could eliminate that capability.  But you 

have to factor that in, as well as the consequences of a potential 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 11. 

action.   Now if I thought that a military attack of this type I 

described would actually eliminate that nuclear capability, and do 

it for a sufficient time, I would be for it, if the consequences of our 

attack were not going to leave us worse off.  But to conclude that 

the consequences won’t leave us worse off, you have to ask a 

bunch of questions.  To his great credit, Reuel Gerecht, our 

colleague, has written an essay last April in the Weekly Standard, 

that’s a very detailed treatment of a military option, which he 

ultimately advocates.  Reuel talks about a campaign, a military 

campaign, that he says would be “a series of actions and counter-

actions between the U.S. and Iran, that would probably transpire 

over many years, perhaps a decade or more.”   

 

Now there’s a long list of questions that arise when you 

contemplate a war with Iran lasting a decade or more.  You’d have 

to know if we buy some time, maybe two or three years, in the 

first attack, what happens.  Well, the most likely thing that 

happens is the inspectors have to go, that’s been our major 

source of intelligence.  So now when you want to figure out what 

else to attack over these years, your capacity actually to pinpoint 

things has diminished.  The probability of hitting false targets, 

wrong targets, killing innocent people, being subjected to media 

treatments then of the mistaken bombing, goes up, and with each 

mistaken bomb, U.S. credibility in the world, in the region, in 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 12. 

Iran, is diminished.  There are other questions.  What are the 

odds then an air war will improve the prospects for democracy in 

Iran?  What are the odds that another war will make Iran less 

threatening to the U.S. and Israel?   

 

What are the odds that another war led by the United States will 

increase America’s capacity to solve the other problems in the 

world—Iraq, Afghanistan, the war on terror, international trade?  

You name the issues, will our credibility be enhanced if we 

conduct another war in the Middle East?  Now Reuel wrote his 

essay before the war in Lebanon.  I would argue that war has 

even further raised the bar, the difficulty, of thinking that a war 

against Iran will actually solve this problem.  We believe that 

another war would leave the United States and the world worse 

off than we would be by pursuing an alternative strategy.  If you 

agree, you should vote in favor of the resolution.  We argue 

there’s plenty of evidence to conclude that if more energetic 

efforts to prevent Iran from getting nuclear—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Two minutes—   

GEORGE PERKOVICH 
—fail, it will still be possible to deter and contain Iran from using 

nuclear weapons against anyone.  Iran’s president is alarming, he 

is indeed alarming.  But the leadership in Iran is collective, and it 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 13. 

includes many old men.  These old men did not get old by being 

suicidal.  Iran, Persia, has thousands of years of grand history, 

and there’s no reason whatsoever to think that Iranian 

nationalists would sacrifice their nation and their civilization in a 

nuclear war of their making.  There is other evidence of Iran’s 

deterability.  Iran has not attacked the weaker United Arab 

Emirates with which it has a dispute over two resource-rich 

islands.  Iran did not attack the Sunni extremist Taliban 

government in Afghanistan, even when that government killed, 

murdered, nine Iranian diplomats.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One minute.   

GEORGE PERKOVICH 
Iran has a Jewish population that is free to leave but chooses not 

to.  There is no evidence that Iran is not deterable.  Indeed, as 

Reuel has written, “The Islamic republic ceased to produce holy 

warriors by the end of the Iran-Iraq War in 1988.  The potential 

for chiliastic rapture has just dried up.”  The bigger point is this.  

Voting for the motion does not mean doing nothing, or turning 

the other cheek to Iran.  Voting for the motion means deciding 

that another war will not solve this problem, and that a robust, 

extremely tough strategy of deterrence and containment would be 

the most effective way to keep a nuclear Iran from threatening the 

United States and its friends.  Thank you.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 14. 

[APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, George Perkovich, for proposing the motion before us, 

“We must tolerate a nuclear Iran.”  And now to the podium we 

call the first opponent of that motion, Patrick Clawson.    

PATRICK CLAWSON 
I thought George gave a very eloquent statement of why we 

should not go to war with Iran, and if that were the proposition 

that we were debating, I think his arguments were spot-on.  That 

however is not the proposition we’re debating.  The proposition 

we’re debating is that we should not tolerate a nuclear Iran.   

That’s quite a different matter.  In fact, there are many things 

that we could do, even if Iran got a nuclear weapon, that would 

suggest to me that we would have non-military ways in order to 

persuade Iran to give up that weapon.  Most of the countries of 

the world which developed—which had nuclear weapons have 

given them up, and not through war.  So there are in fact many 

things that we can do, that would show we cannot tolerate a 

nuclear Iran, short of war.  So I would rather spend my time 

discussing the proposition as stated to you, namely that we 

cannot tolerate a nuclear Iran, rather than discussing whether or 

not to go to war with Iran.   

 

I would like to suggest that when it comes to a nuclear Iran, the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 15. 

proposition is very well-stated, because it leaves vague exactly 

what do we mean.  Are we talking about the nuclear family in 

Iran?  Or what are we talking about here?  [LAUGHTER]   I for 

one have no objections if Iranians care to choose to live in nuclear 

families.  But what we are likely to have is a very gray case.  We 

in fact do not have a smoking gun to show that Iran has a 

nuclear weapons program.  It’s unlikely that we’re going to wake 

up some morning to find that Iran has exploded a nuclear 

weapon.  What we have to deal with instead, is what Iran openly 

declares that it is doing—namely building this complicated thing 

called a nuclear fuel cycle, to make the materials for having a 

nuclear weapon.   

 

The Iranians themselves have described well why they’re doing 

this.  In a remarkable speech, their chief negotiator for their 

nuclear weapons program wrote that having a fuel-cycle 

capability almost means the country that possesses this 

capability is able to produce nuclear weapons, should that 

country have the political will to do so.  Now that’s the judgment 

of the Iranian government.  The Nobel Peace Prize-winning head 

of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Mohammed Al 

Baradei—who you may recall was no friend of George Bush on 

the Iraq matter—says that if Iran does what Iran announces it’s 

intending to do, that Iran will be, quote, “a few months,” end 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 16. 

quote, away from having a nuclear weapon.  So our real question 

is, do we want to see Iran have that kind of a capability, on the 

edge of having a nuclear weapon but not quite there.  We’re not 

going to have the dramatic moment where Iran explodes a nuclear 

weapon necessarily.  If we need to act, we need to act much 

before then.  We need to act when Iran is getting this capability to 

make the essential elements for a nuclear weapon.  That is what 

we have to concentrate on stopping.   

 

Indeed, why do I think that that is something that not only we 

cannot tolerate, but we need not tolerate.  Let me count some of 

the reasons.  First is that what the Iranians are doing, is 

exploiting a loophole in the system that we have constructed to 

make sure that the world does not have a hundred countries with 

nuclear weapons.   The Iranians have correctly identified a real 

weakness in our system of stopping the spread of nuclear 

weapons.  Indeed, Muhammad Al Baradei has proposed a five-

year moratorium on the construction of all fuel-cycle facilities 

worldwide, and has said that any such facility should be under 

international control, because the technology is so dangerous.   

 

If Iran gets away with building this, it will not be the only 

country.  We will not only have to tolerate a nuclear Iran, we will 

have to tolerate a nuclear Turkey, a nuclear Egypt, a nuclear 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 17. 

Saudi Arabia.  A nuclear Algeria.  A nuclear Venezuela.  A nuclear 

South Africa.  A nuclear Brazil.   When we start having 20 or 30 

countries with nuclear weapons, and we start having a multiple 

system of deterrence, it’s going to be very interesting if we have to 

go through the Cuban Missile Crisis another 20 or 30 or 40 

times.  I’m not confident it’ll turn out so positively every time.   I 

don’t think that deterrence is something that we can count on 

working every time, the way it did work with the Soviets, once the 

Soviets got so tired and Brezhnev took over, and couldn’t care 

less about revolution.  But in any case, I say we cannot tolerate a 

nuclear Iran, because if we tolerate a nuclear Iran, we will be 

tolerating many, many more nuclear countries, and that is not 

something that will lead to peace in the world.   

 

Furthermore, we need not tolerate a nuclear Iran, because there 

is much that we can do to stop it without having to talk about 

going to war.  The fact is that Iran has acknowledged to the 

International Atomic Energy Agency that it’s been carrying out 

these clandestine nuclear activities for 18 years.  But they haven’t 

gotten very far.  Now, a lot of that has broadcast our success, in 

fact having a system which does limit what Iran can do.  We have 

had a lot of successes in our efforts in stopping Iran’s program.  

You may recall that we were very worried when the Soviet Union 

fell apart that its scientists and nuclear matter would show up 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 18. 

around the world, causing proliferation.  We started a big 

program called the Nunn-Lugar Program to prevent that.  And in 

fact, none of it has shown up in Iraq.  None of it.   

 

Indeed, the Iranians have had to, on the whole, do things 

themselves.  The only thing that they were able to buy was a set 

of blueprints from A.Q. Khan of Pakistan.  I don’t know about 

you, but I can’t assemble furniture from Ikea when I buy it with 

the blueprints.  I certainly can’t program my VCR with the 

instructions that come with it.  So buying a set of blueprints 

didn’t really get the Iranians necessarily that far ahead.  Indeed, 

that’s why their program has taken 18 years, and is going very 

slowly.  President Ahmadinejad of Iran claimed this last spring 

that they were going to have—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Two minutes—   

PATRICK CLAWSON 
—3,000 centrifuges up and operational by the end of the year.  I 

don’t think he’s going to have 300.  And we can, by reinforcing 

our system of controls on Iran’s access to advanced technology, 

by mobilizing the world community, slow down Iran’s program 

dramatically.  To the point where Iran might be able to make one 

bomb, but I don’t think it’ll be able to make a lot of bombs, and it 

certainly won’t have a way to deliver that thing.  And if this bomb 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 19. 

ends up being some two-ton monstrosity that they can barely fit 

into a bread truck, then they won’t have easy ways of delivering 

this thing.  So, there are always ways in which the control on 

technologies makes the real difference.  That’s why we should 

continue our efforts to limit Iran’s access to these advanced 

technologies, rather than tolerating a nuclear Iran and saying, 

well, now you’re in the nuclear club.  Okay, join the club, you can 

do what you want.  No.  We should, even if Iran’s program 

progresses dramatically, continue to press them, continue to 

work on them—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One minute—   

PATRICK CLAWSON 
—and not tolerate it.  Furthermore, as George laid out at the end 

of his presentation, there are excellent reasons to think that, in 

fact, the Iranian government is pretty cautious, in spite of this 

Ahmadinejad of the moment.  On the whole, right now the 

Iranians think that they’re on top of the world and the strategic 

situation’s very good for them.   But that too will change, and our 

job is to press them, press them so that the cautious element—

which I entirely agree with George is very much there in the 

leadership—comes to the fore, and the Iranians decide that this 

thing too risky, it’s not good for Iran’s security, and we can get 

them to stop this program, or if the program’s advanced a long 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 20. 

way, we can get them to reverse it.  Most of the countries that 

have had nuclear weapons have given them up.  So we do not 

have to tolerate a nuclear Iran, we can get them to stop, or if 

necessary to reverse.   

[APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, Patrick Clawson.  We now turn to the proponents 

once again, and to Sanam Vakil.   

SANAM VAKIL 
Thank you.  It’s a pleasure to be here tonight to tell you why we 

must tolerate a nuclear Iran.  It’s time for the United States to 

rewrite the balance of power.  Iran has been using its nuclear 

program to bolster its legitimacy, domestically in Iran, regionally 

in the Middle East, and internationally, And this tactic is coming 

at the expense of American credibility and influence in these 

arenas.  So by engaging Iran over its nuclear program, 

Washington can take this tool of coercion out of Tehran’s hands, 

and once again have a larger degree of influence as well as 

credibility within Iran, within the region of the Middle East, and 

internationally.  Let me tell you how Tehran is using its nuclear 

program to its advantage.  Let me start with the domestic.   

 

By engaging, the U.S. would prevent the Iranian regime from 

using the nuclear program as a pretext for regime preservation.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 21. 

Through its domestic policies, Tehran has advanced its power 

under the guise of this program.  The administration of Mahmoud 

Ahmadinejad is tactically manipulating its nationalistic nuclear 

ambitions to foster support domestically.   Important though, is if 

you ask the average Iranian, what is nuclear energy, or what is 

uranium enrichment, they wouldn’t be able to tell you.  This is 

what the government has homed in on.  They’ve been able to 

exploit the double standards that exist within the international 

community, vis-à-vis Iran’s nuclear program, compared to India’s, 

Pakistan’s, North Korea’s, and even Israel’s.  This is what the 

government draws strength.  An edict was issued roughly six 

months ago through the National Security Council preventing 

negative media from being reported on nuclear issues 

domestically, and the government uses censorship of media to 

control popular access to any nuclear-related information, among 

other information as well.   

 

This way, the government has been successful in perpetuating 

nuclear nationalism, and controlling the effect of that 

nationalism.  For Iran, the nuclear issue is linked to the nation’s 

place in the modern world, national pride, and resistance against 

the West.  An effort to prevent Iran’s program from advancing is 

further associated to discrimination, and perpetuated by fears of 

sanctions and regime change.  More interestingly, as I observed 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 22. 

this summer during my visit to Tehran, Ahmadinejad has more 

support throughout Tehran today and in other cities on foreign 

policy issues than he did last year after he was surprisingly 

elected.   

 

This is due to his confrontational approach, compared to the 

policy of détente that was pursued under the Hatami 

administration.  You might ask why.  That’s because many 

Iranians feel quite happy and proud that he has taken on the 

nuclear portfolio and succeeded in garnering more concessions 

for Iran, compared to what was going on during the tenure of 

President Hatami.  So these confrontational tactics are also 

domestic tactics pursued by the government, acts of deflection to 

perpetuate a constant state of fear domestically, with regards to 

sanctions and even a military strike, and these tactics are 

designed to strengthen the hand of the regime and the unclear 

program.  This is why we should tolerate a nuclear Iran.  We 

should think about the Iranians at home that have to suffer 

under the regime.  The same time, the government is using the 

opportunity of the nuclear threat to launch a domestic crackdown 

on elites within the system.  They’ve closed down reformist 

newspapers.  They’re purging universities of secular academics.  

They’re detaining students.  They’re purging bureaucrats from the 

system.  All in an effort to silence opposition, and all under the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 23. 

paradigm and all under the guise of the nuclear program.   

 

The regime is ever more united in the face of opposition.  Let’s 

also consider a counter-factual.  If we do not tolerate Iran’s 

unclear program, we are playing into the hands of Ahmadinejad.  

He dreams of becoming a war president.  Why was he elected?  He 

was elected on an economic platform.  He was elected to be a 

populistic President.  But since he’s been in power for the past 

year, he has yet to meet the demands of the people, and he has 

been pursuing foreign policy issues, not economic ones.  Any 

nuclear strike, military strike, or sanctions would give him just 

cause for continuing to neglect his electoral mandate.   

 

So let me offer you even one more final reason why we should 

tolerate a nuclear Iran on the domestic agenda.  The government 

is further playing to these domestic nationalistic sentiments of 

the Iranian street, and playing up against the Iranian street that 

has historically been very pro-American.  They’re using their 

imagery of the war, and they’re using fear of sanctions and regime 

change to change the sentiment in Iran against the United States, 

and this is a huge loss for Washington.  Let’s turn to the region.  

Ahmadinejad has also exploited the nuclear issue to no end.  This 

issue has gained a lot of support among the Arab and Muslim 

street.  He’s spoken of the double standards that exist among 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 24. 

U.S. policies in the Middle East.  He’s taken on the plight of the 

Palestinians, challenging the order in the recent war this 

summer, and he’s earned praise in capitols from Cairo to Jakarta.  

There’s also a credible—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Two minutes—   

SANAM VAKIL 
—threat of proxy war.  It’s a notable one, and the regime has 

cultivated relations with proxies to counterbalance the very large 

American presence in the region with two unfinished wars on 

Iran’s borders.  So Tehran’s message is simple—it’s a regime not 

to be reckoned with [sic].  The U.S. is in a weakened position in 

Iraq, Palestine, Lebanon, Afghanistan, and with this growing 

conflict within the religion of Islam.  Tehran is exploiting this to 

its advantage, drawing on the Arab street for support at the 

expense of the United States.  Internationally.  The regime’s 

confrontational regional and domestic approach of the nuclear 

program has also divided and weakened the international 

community at Washington’s expense.  Unable to unite the 

international community and drive a consensus on sanctions, 

only weakens Washington’s position further.  Jacques Shirac 

recently defected, and China and Russia are unable to back 

Washington—   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 25. 

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One minute—   

SANAM VAKIL 
—on any sanctions in this nuclear jockeying that’s going back 

and forth.  Let’s compare Ahmadinejad.  He’s able to rally 118 

NAM nations to support Iran’s ambitions, and the United States 

can’t rally the P-5 and the Security Council?  That’s depressing.  

So, Ahmadinejad says he supports dialogue, let’s take him up on 

this offer.  I leave you with this.  The U.S. is losing the Iranian 

street, it’s moving into dangerous territory in the Arab and 

Muslim world, and it’s losing support in the Security Council.  

Let’s take the lever away from Tehran.  Let’s not allow them to 

exploit their nuclear program at our expense anymore.  Thank 

you.   

[APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, Sanam Vakil.  Our next speaker, opposing the 

motion, is Reuel Marc Gerecht.    

REUEL MARC GERECHT 
Bigotry against tall men.  I just want to start off by thanking 

George for using my own words against me.  [LAUGHTER]  I sort 

of had the sensation of arguing with my wife and I inevitably lose 

those encounters.  I will suggest that perhaps he maybe used 

some of my words a little selectively.  I mean, I think Patrick 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 26. 

handled the geo-strategic issues rather well, I’m not going to go 

back over those.  I also am not going to go over a point-

counterpoint on the individual repercussions of a bombing run.  I 

did that, as George said, at great length in a Weekly Standard 

piece and there’s no reason for me to torture any of you here who 

read it the first time through.  But I will focus on a couple of 

issues which I think tend to get overlooked, particularly in 

American and Europe audiences.  When I hear the other side 

talking, I hear them talking about Iran as if it’s a status quo 

country.  I almost never hear them talk about God.  I almost 

never hear them talk about the religious inspiration that still 

fuels the regime at the very top.  What people have been 

anticipating inside of the Islamic republic for the longest period of 

time, is that it would go thermidor.   

 

They thought it with Rafsanjani, who by the way should really be 

considered the father of the Iranian nuclear weapon.  They 

thought it with him, even though at the very same time he was 

unleashing the Intelligence Ministry, the Revolutionary Guard 

Corps and assassination teams and bombing teams that went 

around the world in the 1980s and ‘90s.  They thought it about 

Rafsanjani when he was calling these ecumenical movements, 

bringing in Sunni militants into Tehran on a regular basis and 

having outreach programs.  By the way, Ayman al-Zawahiri, Al 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 27. 

Qaeda’s number two, has been probably Tehran’s favorite poster 

boy for over 20 years.  I will just add there’s something deeply 

suspicious about members of Al Qaeda moving through Iran 

before 9-11 and moving through Iran after 9-11.   

 

It’s also very unusual for individuals who are under house arrest 

in Tehran to be placing cell phone calls to operational units of Al 

Qaeda in Saudi Arabia.  That is not the usual routine that people 

have when they’re under house arrest.  I think we have to 

understand that absolutely, when you deal with the vast majority 

of Iranian people, certainly Iranian men—these are the ones we’re 

primarily talking about—that that chiliastic drive that you saw in 

the 1980s, they were really the mothership of much of the 

jihadism mentality that we see today transferred over to the 

Sunni world, it’s dead.  It died.  If nothing else it died with the 

end of Khomeini who was sort of the charismatic inspiration.  

Unfortunately for the hardcore and for the elite, it’s not dead.  I 

would argue it is as alive today as it was before.   

 

That doesn’t mean, once again, that you will not find individuals 

in that league who cannot be, quote, quite pragmatic.  I was quite 

struck by the commentary of the fellow on CBS, the very, very old 

fellow, who went to interview Ahmadinejad and he said he seemed 

like a very rational man.  That is I think a very Western comment, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 28. 

because we have this sort of false juxtaposition that individuals of 

die-hard belief and faith cannot be rational.  They absolutely are.  

I mean Khomeini was a very, very rational man, he had a certain 

love of Neoplatonism that people don’t talk about but he was a 

more or less rational man.  The same is true of Ahmadinejad but 

Ahmadinejad is a die-hard believer.  So by the way is Khomeini, 

so by the way I would argue is Rafsanjani.  What we have to 

worry about, is in fact that the anti-Americanism at that level has 

not diminished.  You have to think, do you want to do what is 

necessary to try to stop them from getting nuclear weaponry, 

because you’re not primarily talking about an exchange of 

nuclear weapons being a firing-off between the United States and 

Iran.  The Iranians realize that will probably end up very badly for 

them.   

 

What are you interested in is, will this give them an umbrella for 

protection of terrorism.  I think if you look at the Western track 

record dealing with the clerical regime, that you have to say we’ve 

done a very poor job of responding to them.  In many ways we 

have been at war with the Islamic republic since its inception, 

except we have not responded.   They have bombed, they have 

attacked, they have killed American soldiers, we did not respond.  

I suggest to you that what you’re going to see life they get nuclear 

weapons is a new inspiration, I think it’s already out there, and I 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 29. 

would expect that Ahmadinejad is once again trying to do what 

Khomeini and Rafsanjani had tried in the 1980s and failed.   

 

That was to lead the radical Islamic world on a new anti-

American jihad.  I think you’re going to see them try to do it 

again, and the acquisition of nuclear weapon is a key to that 

element.  It is their safeguard, it is their protection.  Once they 

have that I would argue that in fact the odds of them being able 

to strike the United States through proxies or directly will go up 

astronomically.  Should you take that risk?  I would say no, that 

you have to say, do you want to give individuals who run what I 

would call sort of a more sophisticated version of bin Ladinism, 

do you want to let them have the nuke?   I would say under no 

circumstances.  Is it worthwhile to take the repercussion from 

that in Afghanistan, which I don’t think are that much, in Iraq, 

and I might add, the way Iraq is going it’s going to be so bad—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Two minutes—   

REUEL MARC GERECHT 
—it’s going to be very difficult for the Iranians to try to make a 

difference.  If you are willing to absorb the repercussion of that, I 

would say yes, absolutely, the nightmare scenarios that you 

would have when you have this hardcore elite, which I would 

argue will become more and more radical.  Because in fact the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 30. 

vast majority of Iranians have sheared away from the visions and 

the dreams and the promises of the Islamic revolution.  They are 

not going in the direction of their citizenry, would that they were.  

They’re going in the opposite direction.  The people inside of that 

regime, particularly I would argue the most important people, the 

clergy, the dissident clergy that I would argue are still the hope 

for that regime in the future, have in fact lost ground if not been 

completely stuffed.   I would agree with Sanam that public 

diplomacy is a very good idea.  The United States should try to 

wage as best a public diplomacy as possible.  But public 

diplomacy is not going to—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One minute—    

REUEL MARC GERECHT 
—the nuclear weapons issue.  Would that we actually could 

improve our position inside Iran, and I would just add by the way, 

the United States has a far better position inside that country, 

and it has maintained a relatively, if not pretty seriously hostile 

position against the Islamic republic now for over 25 years, while 

the Europeans have constantly tried to use engagement, yet their 

position inside of Iran I think is far, far less.  Hostility towards the 

clerical regime has not cost us inside that country, it has in fact 

gained us a following.  So you have to decide, are you willing to 

take a really serious risk, and I would add just tactically, you 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 31. 

have to say yes.  Because diplomacy you know isn’t going to work 

unless you threaten the possibility, you have to be serious about 

it, of using military strikes.  The only reason the Europeans—and 

they will tell you that if you talk to the Germans and the French 

and the British—   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Time is up, Reuel.   

REUEL MARC GERECHT 
Time’s up?   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
We’ll hear from the Europeans later I think.  Thank you very 

much, Reuel Marc Gerecht.  [APPLAUSE]  Now our third and final 

speaker in support of the motion, and that is Karim Sadjadpour.    

KARIM SADJADPOUR 
Okay.  Thank you so much for coming, it’s really a privilege to be 

here and it’s a privilege to be personally speaking for Bill Kristol.  

It’s a big privilege and a big challenge.  When I was in high school 

my father used to watch the Sunday morning talk shows.  My 

favorite guest was always Bill Kristol because he was always so 

thoughtful and sensible and sensitive, I just assumed he was a 

liberal.  I must admit I was a late bloomer intellectually.  

[LAUGHTER]   

 

I would just like to first start off by reiterating the point that 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 32. 

George made, that I think all six of us here are after the same 

thing at the end of the day—an Iran which is democratic, which is 

free, which is prosperous, and which is not armed with a nuclear 

weapon.  That would be the ideal option.  So the question is not 

whether or not the Islamic republic is a cruel regime.  It is, I can 

tell you as someone who has been detained in Tehran by the 

Revolutionary Guard, it is a cruel regime.  The question is not, 

again, why or whether or not Iran should have a nuclear weapon 

we should tolerate.  I think personally it would be disastrous if 

they were to acquire a nuclear weapon.  But the question on our 

panel is, should we tolerate it, and that begs the question, should 

we go to war with Iran to prevent it.  Which cost would be higher, 

to actually accept Iran acquiring a nuclear weapon, or going to 

war with them to prevent it.   

 

I would suggest that the latter option would be far more 

dangerous, bombing Iran to prevent it from acquiring a nuclear.  

I’m a bit surprised tonight that the other side of the table is 

seeming to—I’m a bit too junior to contradict them too much—but 

they’re running away from the argument somewhat because both 

Reuel and Bill are on the record saying that they would bomb 

Iran.  So hopefully, we hear that from Bill in the next round.  

[LAUGHTER]   I would just argue similar to what Sanam said, 

that if Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was here tonight, he would be 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 33. 

arguing on the other side of the table, meaning I think he very 

much wants to see a confrontation between the U.S. and Iran.   

 

I will just suggest why in three different contexts, why the 

Iranians, particularly the hard-liners in Tehran, would like to see 

a confrontation between the U.S. and Iran.  The first context is 

the regional context.  What was very interesting for me following 

the right-wing Iranian media was these comments which 

Secretary Rice made after the war in Lebanon in July.  What she 

called it was “the birth pangs of a new Middle East.”  When I was 

following the Iranian right-wing media, it was very interesting 

how much they agreed with Secretary Rice, they said indeed it is 

the birth pangs of a new Middle East.   Indeed this is a proxy war 

between the U.S. and Iran for hegemony in the Middle East, for 

Arab and Muslim hearts and minds.  In fact we’re very well-

placed to fight this war, and what’s very disconcerting right now 

is that these same newspapers in Tehran which are very fascist 

when it comes to domestic politics, are Jeffersonian democrats 

when it comes to regional politics because they say, actually, 

democratic elections are very much in our interest.   

 

Hamas came to power in Palestine, Hezbollah came to power in 

Lebanon through democratic elections, the Muslim Brotherhood 

had a very strong showing in Egypt.  Hardcore religious came to 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 34. 

power in Iraq via democratic elections.  So in fact, we are winning 

this war for Arab and Muslim hearts and minds, and given the 

U.S.’s low standing in the region, it looks like history is now on 

our side.  Opinion polls which are conducted show that among 

the Arab street, the three most popular leaders are Hassan 

Nasrallah of Hezbollah, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran, and 

Khaled Meshaal of Hamas.  So right now Iran feels in a very good 

position, and I think that bombing the country they would feel 

even better-placed to fight this war for Arab and Muslim hearts 

and minds.   

 

We should take into account that if we bomb Iran, oil prices are 

likely going to go up to $150 a barrel.  Currently the regime is 

making about $200 million a day on oil revenue, so we double 

that, they’re going to make $400 million a day on oil revenue.  I 

would argue that that will put them in a far better position to 

support Hamas and Hezbollah financially than if we don’t bomb 

the country.  I think that just, if we’re serious about fighting this 

war, which is becoming very much this self-fulfilling prophecy of 

the clash of civilizations, we’re going to have to figure out a way to 

resolve our differences in the Middle East without using bombs.  

The second point is from a non-proliferation perspective, from a 

nuclear perspective.  What would happen if we actually bomb 

Iran to try to prevent them from acquiring a nuclear weapon.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 35. 

Let’s play out the scenario, in fact I played out the scenario with a 

Navy captain.   

 

Say we bomb these sites.  First of all we don’t know where many 

of them are, some of them are underground, some of them we 

don’t have intelligence on, so we can’t be sure that we bombed 

the right sites.  Second of all some of them are near population 

centers, we would be killing Iranian civilians.  Quite frankly, you 

know, if you talk to nuclear physicists they say, well, Iran 

actually has quite a bit of know-how right now.  It’s like baking a 

cake.  They have the ingredients, they have the recipe, and they 

have the cooks, they have the scientists.  Unless you’re going to 

kill the scientists, you’re going to kill the cooks, I mean, it’s going 

to be very difficult to set back this program a long way.  At most, 

in talking to nuclear physicists, it will take Iran two to three years 

to recalibrate.  At that point, if we bomb them, international 

public opinion may well side with them, and the Iranians may say 

in fact we now are after a nuclear weapon because we now have 

been shown that we need it to protect our sovereignty.   

 

At that point, when you bomb these sites and you don’t know 

where Iran is recalibrating these facilities, maybe underground, if 

we really then want to avert the prospect we’ll have to send in 

group troops.  At this point, with our troops spread thin in Iraq 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 36. 

and Afghanistan, that doesn’t look like a welcome prospect.  Now 

from the domestic perspective, this is the one that for me I feel 

most strongly about.  When I first started this job, I didn’t get 

involved in this work because I was passionate about centrifuges 

and cascades and things like that, this is what George was 

saying—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Two minutes—   

KARIM SADJADPOUR 
—but about the prospect of the future for the Iranian people.  

There’s this widespread notion that all Iranians are in favor of a 

nuclear program, which I would like to debunk.  I think that, on 

one hand Iran is a nationalist country, and many people feel 

strongly that we’re a great nation, why this double standard.  

India and Pakistan can have this project, why can’t we.  But at 

the same time this is a country that we forget experienced an 

eight-year war with Iraq.  Not really one family was left unscathed 

by this war, there were half a million casualties.  No one 

romanticizes the conflict or the prospect of further militarization.   

Quite frankly this is a very technical project, the idea of enriching 

uranium as opposed to importing enriched uranium from abroad, 

so the idea that your average Iranian in Shiraz or Tehran wakes 

up in the morning and says, you know, if only we could enrich 

uranium today our lives would be so much better half, has also 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 37. 

been very much exaggerated.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One minute—   

KARIM SADJADPOUR 
But I would argue that you present to the Iranian people two 

options.  You present this publicly to the regime.  A, pursue this 

nuclear program unequivocally, come what may, for the 

sanctions, isolation, potential militarization.  Or B, you take 

certain nuclear compromises and you reenter the international 

community.  You’re going to have the people put a lot of pressure 

on the regime to change their behavior, and so far this has not 

been a policy option which has been issued by the U.S.  Thank 

you very much.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you.  [APPLAUSE]  That’s Karim Sadjadpour, and now 

speaking against the motion, Bill Kristol.    

WILLIAM KRISTOL 
Thank you, Robert.  Let me begin by thanking Bob Rosenkranz 

for bringing Intelligence Squared to New York and to the United 

States.  I don’t know if Intelligence Squared has a slogan or motto 

in London, but over here you might want to think about, “Fair 

and balanced.”  [LAUGHTER]  “We debate, you decide.”   You 

might almost call this a no-spin zone here, you know.  With 

Robert Siegel, it’s Bill O’Reilly…  [LAUGHTER]  I shouldn’t have 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 38. 

said that, this will ruin his career on NPR, and I’ll never be invited 

back to “All Things Considered.”   

 

I personally came in undecided, um, as many of you did, and 

even leaning slightly to the other side, but I’ve been convinced by 

Reuel and  [LAUGHTER]  Patrick’s brilliant arguments.  Bob said 

he wanted intellectually respectable positions on both sides, and I 

have a high opinion of George and Sanam and Karim.  But I’ve 

got to say that, unfortunately, they’re intelligent people but the 

arguments, while respectable, are not convincing.  I was put off 

by Karim’s false praise [LAUGHTER] of me for a second, and I 

salute Sanam for her genuine concern obviously for the Iranian 

people who I think we all agree deserve a much better regime 

than they have, and I think we all agree, we haven’t talked about 

this, deserve much more aggressive efforts on the part of the 

United States and other democracies and Europe could do much 

more here, to help them liberate themselves from this regime.  

George is one of the more reasonable Democrats in Washington.  

I’ve known him for a while and he worked for Senator Biden and I 

know that to be a fact, but the tip-off for all of you was when he 

said that he didn’t believe we should kill ourselves.  [LAUGHTER]   

GEORGE PERKOVICH 
I thought that was the safe position.    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 39. 

WILLIAM KRISTOL 
That was a courageous break from the mainstream of the 

Democratic Party…  [LAUGHTER]  I want to pay tribute to George, 

I’m doing my best to ruin all these people’s careers—   

GEORGE PERKOVICH 
That’s the conservative position against euthanasia—   

WILLIAM KRISTOL 
I’m doing my best to ruin all of their careers.  Look, we should not 

tolerate a nuclear Iran.  Three quick reasons, and a couple of 

them have been touched on but maybe not developed.  George 

says, and I think everyone probably agrees that we have to be 

tougher in our diplomacy, think more seriously about sanctions, 

and move perhaps outside the Security Council to get sanctions if 

we can, explore financial pressure to really squeeze Iran which I 

think the administration is beginning to do.  Secretary of the 

Treasury Paulsen is working pretty seriously on this, and that 

would be done I think outside the Security Council through a sort 

of coalition of the willing on the Finance Ministry side.  This is all 

good.  None of this will work unless it’s backed up by the threat of 

force.  Diplomacy will only work if there is a real threat of force, 

not just saying options are on the table, but a sense that we 

really won’t tolerate the outcome if Iran does not yield, if the 

moderates to the degree there are some in the Iranian regime, 

aren’t empowered by the pressure we’re putting on to prevent the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 40. 

headlong rush to nuclear weapons, and manage to change course 

domestically.  

 

Diplomacy can’t work without the threat of force, therefore, it 

would really be disastrous to diplomacy to say, we must tolerate a 

nuclear Iran.  So whatever people might think one would have to 

do, and sometimes one has to do things in the real world seven or 

10 years from now or three years from now I suppose, we should 

not say we should tolerate a nuclear Iran and therefore you 

should all vote “No,” just to help diplomacy along.  [LAUGHS]   

But I’m serious about that, and I’m serious that I believe 

shouldn’t at the end of—I will satisfy Karim and say that I would 

bomb Iran in a pinch.  But it is important to not even signal 

weakness.   

 

The only reason the Europeans got serious in 2003 is that we 

went into Iraq, that we hadn’t yet encountered the difficulties 

we’ve encountered in the subsequent three years, and Iranians 

were worried and the Europeans were worried that Bush really 

would use force.   That’s what made the Europeans much tougher 

than it looked as if they would have been prior to 2003.  So for 

diplomacy to work, you need the credible threat of force, you 

therefore could not say that we would tolerate, or certainly not 

that we must tolerate a nuclear Iran.   So for diplomacy to work 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 41. 

you need the threat of force.  The credible, real threat of force.  

Real plans, real attempt to lay the groundwork for it if it comes to 

that.  Secondly, deterrence.  That is the ultimate argument 

obviously on the other side, we can deter Iran, we deterred the 

Soviet Union, we deterred China.   Pakistan and India have 

nuclear weapons and so far at least haven’t used them.  That 

depends on the nature of the regime.  Is this the Brezhnev 

regime, so to speak?  Conservative, cautious old men, as George 

said?  Or is this a much more radical regime, or at least a regime 

with radical elements in it, and do we have confidence that the 

radical elements won’t prevail internally?  I don’t think so.   

 

This is a rising, confident, ambitious, aggressive regime, that 

thinks it’s carrying forth a historic mission, sort of a jihadist 

mission on behalf of Islam in general, particularly Shia Islam but 

perfectly willing to work with Sunni jihadists and also to compete 

with Sunni jihadists in radicalism which is itself very dangerous 

and of course that’s the story in some respects of the last 25 

years in the Middle East,  with the Wahabes and the Iranians 

competing to radicalize Islam and unfortunately, succeeding.   

 

Letting Iran progress towards nuclear weapons just increases the 

strength of all the worst radicalizing forces, the jihadist forces, 

within Islam.  It would be disastrous in my opinion not just for 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 42. 

Iran to get nuclear weapons.  It’s disastrous for them to succeed 

in progressing towards nuclear weapons over the next two, four, 

six, eight years.  Every month that we huff and puff and the 

Europeans huff and puff and we put off another Security Council 

resolution and they progress and Ahmadinejad comes here and is 

treated well by the Council of Foreign Relations and—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Two minutes.   

WILLIAM KRISTOL 
—and pays no price for anything he says or anything he does, 

every month and every year that that happens, the worst forces in 

the Middle East are strengthened, every government that’s 

teetering and isn’t sure which side to join basically, our side, the 

moderate side or the radical side, decides they have to cut a deal 

with the radical side.  Individuals decide that looks like the way of 

the future, this is the classic, dangerous scenario.  One hopes 

that the more moderate people, the more moderate forces in the 

Iranian regime, are going to prevail, and the only way to help 

them to prevail, is not to reward Ahmadinejad.   

 

That is what we are now doing by holding open the possibility 

that we would tolerate a nuclear Iran.  It’s not just that it would 

be terrible if they got nuclear weapons.  There, I think 

incidentally, it’s not just tolerating a nuclear Iran, it’s tolerating a 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 43. 

nuclear Egypt and a nuclear Saudi Arabia, and then a whole 

bunch of nuclear countries which itself creates a very dangerous 

world.  It is also the process of getting towards a nuclear Iran, is 

itself extremely dangerous—   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One minute.   

WILLIAM KRISTOL 
I don’t like to use models from the ‘30s or the analogy of the ‘30s 

or Hitler but in this respect it is like the ‘30s.  Hitler’s success at 

each stage strengthened him internally, he didn’t start out in firm 

control of the regime of which he was chancellor.  There were 

others who thought he was reckless.  Every time he did 

something reckless and got away with it, it discredited his 

internal credits, it empowered fascists elsewhere in Europe and 

other regimes began moving in that direction.  The democracies 

became demoralized, we ended up fighting a war against a much 

more powerful fascist alliance-axis than would have been the case 

if we had acted much earlier.  We face that prospect 

unfortunately if we let a jihadist radical regime successfully 

pursue nuclear weapons in the Middle East today.   

[APPLAUSE]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you, William Kristol.  I’m now ready to announce the 

results of the pre-debate vote.  Before the debate, you may recall 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 44. 

you were asked whether you were for or against the motion or 

whether you don’t know.  Here’s the pre-debate tally, for which 

we will not need the U.S. Supreme Court to sort out the answer.   

58 votes for the motion, that we must tolerate a nuclear Iran, 103 

votes against the motion, and 58 don’t knows.  So that was the 

vote before the debate.  We’re now ready for the question-and-

answer portion of the program.  If you would like to put a 

question to our panelists please raise your hand.  Someone on 

either one of the aisles will find you with a microphone.  I’ll call 

on you.  As you’re asking the question, please stand up.  If you’re 

a member of the working press and asking a question, please 

identify yourself.  Otherwise it’s your call, and I’m going to begin 

in the front row, with this young lady.    

WOMAN  
Hi.  I’m not sure how much of it is a question, but I think it is.  

I’m on the “for” side, but I have to say the most compelling 

argument on the “con” is, not the prospect of Iran having a 

nuclear weapon but the prospect of Venezuela, Egypt.  So I feel 

strongly that yes, we must set a precedent, so that we don’t have 

20, 30 nations with nuclear weapons.  But then I wonder, how 

realistic is that?  You look at the nations that are pursuing 

nuclear weapons, and these are nations that feel marginalized 

and threatened.  It’s definitely I think a pursuit, both for 

protection and also for machismo or for popularity in their home.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 45. 

So is it really realistic to think that we are going to now have 10 

more nations with nuclear weapons in the 10, 20 years?  The 

kind of comment along with that too is there’s an interesting 

vicious cycle that’s set in place when, by starting another war you 

are creating this vicious cycle of other regimes feeling threatened, 

and then spurring them on to produce nuclear weapons.  Will we 

be giving Chavez more of an impetus to get into the nuclear 

weapon battle? 

 ROBERT SIEGEL  
Well, since the argument of the one-too-many nuclear Irans was 

made by the opponents, may I ask the supporters of the motion, 

George Perkovich, to answer it.  Does tolerating a nuclear Iran 

imply tolerating many other new nuclear powers?   

 GEORGE PERKOVICH 
Well, I think we’ll come to this later.  We’re now confused about 

what it means to tolerate or not to tolerate, because I happen to 

agree with everything Patrick said because he didn’t talk about 

going to war.  I agree with Reuel and Bill, we should do everything 

we can to try to prevent it.   So if what we mean by “tolerating” is 

that we really, really don’t like it, we’re going to do everything we 

can to stop it, but we would accept living with it if that was the 

alternative other than war, then I think we agree.  If the 

alternative really is what Bill said, but not what Patrick said, that 

not tolerating it means that you are willing to go to war over it, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 46. 

then I would say to your question, there’s only been one case in 

history where there was a military effort to stop a country from 

trying to get nuclear weapons.    

 

That was the Israeli bombing of Iraq in 1981.  You can argue 

what the effects of that were in various ways.  Iraq went to war or 

was at war with Iran, and then, we had another war with them in 

’91 and then we had another war with them in 2003, and their 

nuclear program continued when we didn’t think it was from ’81 

to ’91, but when we thought it was or some people thought it was, 

it turned out it wasn’t.  We’re there now.  Every other case of 

getting a country to stop involved politics, negotiations, giving 

them benefits, security guarantees, trade-offs, and deals.  So we 

should be concerned about if Iran succeeds, what happens.  But 

the way the rest of the world’s going to respond to this is going to 

be if you marshal diplomatic pressure, economic sanctions, plus 

rewards.  That’s the way to do it.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Reuel Marc Gerecht, why don’t you reply to what George 

Perkovich is saying.   

REUEL MARC GERECHT 
I would just like to say that I’m very uncomfortable being in the 

majority if that poll is correct.  I think the other side should 

demand a recount.  But I mean, just a quick comment on that.  I 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 47. 

don’t think it’s any coincidence that Gamal Mubarak announced 

that Egypt is going to have a civilian nuclear program.  I think the 

timing of that, because of the Iranian nuclear program, was 

intentional.  I would add that there’s a great deal of suspicion 

that the Saudis were in part financial backers of the Pakistani 

nuclear program.  It is impossible I think to overestimate the 

fierce hatred and competition that exists and has existed between 

Saudi Arabia and the Islamic republic from 1979, Bill alluded to 

it.   

 

Much of the Islamic militancy that we see today, the fuel behind 

bin Ladinism, actually grew out of that competition in the 1980s.  

It would be surprising not to see the Saudis make some play for a 

nuke.  I would also add, I wouldn’t at all be surprised to see 

Turkey go in a nuclear direction.  I think the Iraq war certainly 

showed to the Turks they cannot rely upon NATO as an 

institution of their defense, and I think the animosity that does 

exist in Turkey, even if it goes in a more Islamic direction which I 

think it will, will not diminish its profound suspicions of the 

Islamic republic.  I think it would be a good guess that the Turks 

too would start working on a nuclear program.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Next question, do we have someone on that side?  Won’t you 

hand the microphone…and then we’ll come over to the other side 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 48. 

of the room next.  Could you stand up, please.    

EUGENE LINDEN 
Eugene Linden’s my name.  Given the present situation in Iraq 

and Afghanistan, and the possibility of $150-a-barrel oil, do we 

really have a credible military threat?    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
You mean does, is the threat from the United States credible?  

Patrick Clawson.   

PATRICK CLAWSON 
In a word, yes.  First off, if the United States military were to take 

action Iran’s nuclear sites, this would be the Navy and the Air 

Force, which are not overly committed in Afghanistan and Iraq.  It 

would be quite a doable thing to destroy the key nodes in Iran’s 

nuclear program.  We don’t have to flatten the whole thing, don’t 

have to go in and Dresden and knock it all down.  We just have to 

knock out the key nodes, and there are some key nodes without 

which that program cannot function, and it would take a number 

of years to rebuild.  The question arises as to what Iran’s 

response would be if we did this.  Well, we don’t know, it would 

depend upon the circumstances.   

 

But I would suggest that there was a time when in fact as far as 

the Iranians are concerned, we did bomb them, and we did take 

military action against them.  That’s the end of the Iran-Iraq war, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 49. 

when we after all, in what we see as a tragic accident, shot down 

an Iranian airbus and killed 200-plus Iranian civilians.  But they 

saw that very bluntly as the United States entering the war.  

Indeed, this being holy defense week, and the Iranian newspapers 

have been full of interviews with people about the war and how it 

happened, and Rafsanjani has asked, well why did you end the 

war?  Because America ended the war against us.  So the fact is 

that the last time we bombed Iran the result was within a week, 

that the Iranians accepted a cease-fire, it stopped a war which 

had killed 700,000 people.  We paid no price in our relationships 

with the Iranians.  That’s because the Iranian people were sick 

and tired of that war.  So the task is up to us to paint this 

nuclear weapon as the device which the mullahs are using to 

consolidate their power and their control and to keep their grip on 

the country.  Because if Iranians perceive that what we are doing 

is getting rid of the tool by which the mullahs are going to 

consolidate their control, that’s a very different situation than if 

Iranians think that this is a national bomb needed for national 

defense.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
I wanted to see if the other side agrees that there is a credible 

military threat, no ground troops, simply air strikes.  Karim.   

KARIM SADJADPOUR 
Obviously the United States is powerful enough to bomb Iran, 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 50. 

that’s not the question.  The question is the day after we bomb 

Iran, just like the question in Iraq should have been the day after 

we bomb Iraq.  Obviously the United States could change 

probably every regime in the world apart from a few, China, 

Russia, India.  But what are the repercussions for the day after?  

I would argue that at the moment even the Iranians believe that 

Iranian soft power is dominating U.S. hard power in Iraq.  I would 

just put on the table that it’s fundamentally incompatible to think 

we’re going to stabilize Iraq, while simultaneously dropping 

bombs on Iran, not to mention other countries in the region.  If 

we really want to try to tranquilize Lebanon, we will see a 

resurgent Hezbollah if we drop bombs on Iran.  We want to 

tranquilize Palestine and strengthen the moderate Palestinians 

we’re going to strengthen Hamas, if we do that.  I just want to 

make a further point that, Bill and Reuel have written that it’s 

unclear what would happen domestically within Iran if we 

dropped bombs.  Maybe actually, we could over time strengthen 

the Iranian moderates.  This always reminds me of a quote from 

John Limber, the great U.S. diplomat who was actually taken 

hostage in Iran for 444 days during the 1979 revolution.   

 

He was someone like many Iranians, my father included, who 

believed that when the Shah was deposed, the Shah’s government 

would be replaced by a secular democracy, and what we saw of 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 51. 

course was that Khomeini came to, to power.  He later wrote in 

his memoirs that, that what he learned was that when sudden 

upheavals happen, revolutions are not won by those who can 

write incisive op-ed pieces.  [LAUGHTER]  I think likewise in Iran 

we should have no illusions that if we bomb the country it’s going 

to be moderates who come to the helm either within Iran or 

within the region.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Sanam Vakil?   

SANAM VAKIL 
Could I just add one more thing.  If we also think about bombing 

Iran, we also have to think about not just nuclear nationalism 

that persists within the country, but just inherent nationalism, 

the patriotism of Iranians that they feel for their country, Iranians 

who don’t even love the regime but love Iran.  The same way that 

you might love the United States of America or wherever you’re 

from.  These are the Iranians that will come out in defense of 

their country.  There are many Iranians I spoke with this 

summer, that said in the event of a military strike, they would 

come out in defense of their country and that’s something that we 

should consider.  These are the people that fought an Iran-Iraq 

war, not for two years, not for four years, for eight long years.  

And that same way that you, your sons and your children would 

come out and defend the United States in the event of a military 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 52. 

strike.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Reuel Gerecht?   

REUEL MARC GERECHT 
Yes, I don’t think anyone on this side of the table believes that 

bombing Iran will produce a moderate revolution inside the 

country, and in fact I think we’d say that’s really not the issue at 

all.  The issue is do you believe that an Islamic republic armed 

with nuclear weapons is going to help the United States stabilize 

Iraq.  I think that is not at all true, just the opposite.  As long as 

the radical forces inside of Iran gain power and gain will, I think it 

is impossible to imagine a situation inside of Iraq that is going to 

be stable and in any way pro-American.  I think you will see the 

forces of radicalism inside the Iraqi Shia community, continue to 

gain ground, they’re becoming a dominant force in that society, 

and Iran has no intention of deterring them.  Certainly an Iran 

armed with nuclear weaponry, I don’t think would be a force of 

moderation inside Iraqi politics.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Our next questioner?  Sir.    

MAN  
I’m very sympathetic obviously to the “con” side.  But I think one 

question has to be answered, which is:  at this present time, what 

are you going to do about Western Europe.  What are you going to 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 53. 

do about the Europeans in terms of their support or non-support 

for this kind of event, and the reality that in another two years 

we’re going to have another election.   Blair is on his way out, 

clearly the sense or spirit of accommodation is reflected I think in 

both the Labour Party and in the Conservative Party.  So rather 

than just thinking in terms of next month, what is one’s answer 

to the question, how can we really threaten this unilaterally if we 

cannot bring any of the major powers in Europe along with us.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Bill Kristol, what’s the answer to that question.   

WILLIAM KRISTOL 
The only reason the major powers in Europe are as engaged as 

they are diplomatically and at least talking, some of them, 

sometimes, about sanctions, on Iran is that in fact they were 

worried in 2003 that we might use force.  As the threat of force 

has receded, as we’ve been so reassuring in the last year and 

embraced diplomacy and made clear to the Europeans that we 

put getting along with Europeans I think unfortunately perhaps 

at a higher level of priority than actually dealing with the Iranian 

nuclear program, they of course have cheerfully backed off.  

They’re not going to be ultimately extremely helpful in this.  They 

will not privately shed any tears for the Iranian nuclear program 

and I don’t think we’ll have any great rupture in NATO, we’ll still 

have peacekeeping forces in Afghanistan.  But no, they will 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 54. 

probably not be part of the mission, and they will in some 

ritualistic way, probably denounce it.  But if a nuclear Iran is 

really dangerous and I think it is, we can’t be stopped by the 

lowest common denominators of our allies.  The unfortunate 

truth, I wish Western Europe were different, I wish all of Europe 

were somewhat different, I wish they spent more on the military, I 

wish they were more serious about dealing with coming threats 

from outside their region.  They’re not, and we have to take the 

lead.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Our next question, from the gentleman in the center.   

VAN GREENFIELD 
Van Greenfield.  I voted against to start, I’m still there now.  I 

think that when we recount again, if Karim and Sanam actually 

listen to their own words, then the people against will pick up two 

votes.  I’m very serious about that.  I think that Sanam said that 

Ahmadinejad dreams of becoming a war president.  I fully agree 

with that, completely support that, I think that he believes it with 

his heart and soul.  If he does feel that way, and has a nuclear 

weapon, we’re much worse off.  Karim’s comment was that Iran 

getting a nuclear weapon would be disastrous.  If it’s disastrous if 

they get it, and if he dreams of becoming a war president, I don’t 

see how you don’t vote that way.  The question I’d like to ask is, 

as I sit here I was kind of astounded that we heard about virtually 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 55. 

every country on the globe here, but the one country that we 

didn’t hear anything about, or any effect about, the country in a 

way most affected by the words that have been spoken, is Israel.  

Robert, you can choose who would answer it, but where do Israel 

and our obligation to Israel factor into this?  I mean, they have to 

believe the words— 

[BRIEF AUDIO DROP-OUT]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
—in the presentations, but first I should say that Sanam and 

Karim, you’ve been called upon to debate your own remarks.  

[LAUGHTER]  If there’s something you’d like to say first, feel free 

to.    

KARIM SADJADPOUR 
I stand by the statement that it would be a disaster if Iran were 

acquire a nuclear weapon, but I would just say it would be far 

more disastrous to bomb them to try to prevent them from 

acquiring a nuclear weapon.  These are the scales we’re forced to 

measure right now.  I think Bill and Reuel and Patrick would 

agree that as long as this government is in power in Tehran, they 

will never feel comfortable that it’s somehow lost its nuclear 

ambitions.  As long as this government is in power I think they’ll 

always feel that will happen.  My point is that if we bomb Iran, 

we’re going to prolong the life of this regime I would argue two, 

three, maybe four decades.  That what’s going to happen is that 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 56. 

these radicals are going to come to the helm, they’re going to 

clamp down on any type of moderates, and they’re going to have 

the pretext to do so.  So if you want to preserve the shelf life of 

this regime then we bomb it, that’s my argument.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Sanam, does President Ahmadinejad need U.S. provocation to 

become a war president or war leader, or will he become one on 

his own?   

SANAM VAKIL 
Oh, no, he’s begging the U.S. to do it.  He’s not there just yet.  I 

think you misinterpreted.  He’s looking for the U.S. to bomb Iran 

so he can avoid the economic mandate, his populistic mandate of 

why he was elected.  He is not going to be able to fill the plates of 

74 million Iranians.   And so foreign policy issues are a nice 

method of deflection for this president.  Bombing Iran would 

propel this radical president to a higher post.  The presidency of 

Iran is never, historically and constitutionally, a strong position, 

and we’re making him stronger every day by paying attention to 

him.  If we bomb the country, he will be propelled even more.  We 

will be radicalizing the country in his favor even more, and he will 

be neglecting his economic mandate, and the fastest way to get 

him out of power will be to force him to focus on the economic 

issues that he was elected into office on.    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 57. 

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Patrick Clawson, to what degree is this about the threat perceived 

by Israel from Iran.    

PATRICK CLAWSON 
Well, first you’ll notice that the other side continually does not 

debate the proposition.  They debate a very different proposition.  

The proposition they debate is we should not bomb Iran.  Now if 

that were the question we were debating, it would be an 

interesting debate.  But it’s not what we’re here to do tonight.  

The question is, do we tolerate Iran’s nuclear program.  That’s 

like saying, are we going to have the attitude towards an Iranian 

nuke that we have towards an Indian and a Pakistani nuke.  We 

tolerate that.  We say, naughty-naughty, you shouldn’t have done 

that, but we tolerate it.  The question is, are we going to have that 

kind of an attitude, or are we, as Bill said, going to use instead 

the threat of force in order to back up diplomacy.  Bill didn’t call 

for bombs away, neither did I, and neither did Reuel.  What we 

called for is to have—    

WILLIAM KRISTOL 
I wouldn’t—let’s not go too far here.  [LAUGHTER]  We have a 

diversity of views on this side too, you know.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Some of your teammates are on the record on this— [LAUGHTER]    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 58. 

PATRICK CLAWSON 
There was a wonderful Commentary article by Ed Lutfoch in 

which he said it’s not time to bomb Iran, yet.  It may come to be 

the time.  But it’s not yet the time.  Because what we’re talking 

about is how we can use force in order to—the threat of force in 

order to back up that diplomacy.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
But George Perkovich, you’re the pessimist about the diplomacy.  

You’re the one who’s saying it’s going to end up as an attack or 

not an attack.    

PATRICK CLAWSON 
That’s in part because of the Israel question.  The answer is 

because Israel evaluates the threat to it as much worse than the 

threat to us.  Then it’s quite possible that Israel will decide that 

it’s got to attack Iran well before we decide to attack Iran.  In fact 

I would say that that’s likely that Israel will decide that it has to 

attack Iran, long before we think we have to attack Iran.  That’s 

going to force the issue about what to do about this.  Well, it’s 

precisely because we don’t want to be in that situation that we 

have got to accelerate our efforts on the diplomacy, and we can 

use Israel as that mad dog the threat of which we wave in front of 

the Europeans in order to get them to be more serious about this 

matter.   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 59. 

ROBERT SIEGEL 
George Perkovich.    

GEORGE PERKOVICH 
We don’t disagree with that, that we have to accelerate and 

toughen diplomacy, that we don’t want Iran to have nukes, all of 

that we agree with.  But what does it mean to not tolerate 

something?   

PATRICK CLAWSON 
Step up all those efforts.    

GEORGE PERKOVICH 
I agree, and then if those don’t fail, what does it mean not to talk.  

Bill says it means go to war.  Reuel has said it means go to war.  

Patrick hasn’t quite said that, so I’m not clear what the resolution 

is.    

WILLIAM KRISTOL 
We have a healthy diversity of views on our side, we don’t insist 

on orthodoxy unlike some people, you know.   

PATRICK CLAWSON 
George, you’re saying, don’t tolerate it.  You’re saying take action 

against it.  Well, this proposition is not, go to war with Iran.  

That’s not the proposition we’re debating.    

WILLIAM KRISTOL 
May I make a point, a substantive point—   

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 60. 

GEORGE PERKOVICH 
But what you’re saying is pretend not to tolerate it.   

PATRICK CLAWSON 
No, no, no, no.  We shouldn’t tolerate it—   

GEORGE PERKOVICH 
And then maybe at some point you tolerate it, and Bill says—   

PATRICK CLAWSON 
No, no, we shouldn’t—   

WILLIAM KRISTOL 
This is a semantic debate—    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
To clarify, Patrick Clawson, you’re saying, worst case, if all the 

diplomatic measures you’re talking about don’t succeed, then 

you’ll tolerate it.    

PATRICK CLAWSON 
No.  Worst case, if the only way we can make the diplomatic 

measures succeed, as Bill has said, is if we say at the end of the 

day if they don’t we’ll use force.  Because the only way we can 

make diplomacy work is if we say at the end of the day, we are 

prepared to use force.  That is what we should be doing.  But the 

other side has not said about—George says, we should press 

them, press them.  How the heck are you going to press them, if 

you say at the end of the day that what we’re prepared to do, is 

tolerate it.  They’re not going to be interested in being friends.    

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 61. 

WILLIAM KRISTOL 
Can I say a word on this, this is just semantics.  Look, the 

serious argument and most respectable argument I would say on 

the other side is Karim’s, that bombing would prolong the regime, 

would strengthen the regime.  I take that argument very 

seriously.  Ahmadinejad successfully pursuing and acquiring 

nuclear weapons in my view would strengthen the regime and 

strengthen the radical elements in the regime, much more surely 

than bombing would.  Bombing is of course, you don’t know what 

effects.  There’s empirical, historical evidence of the use of force 

destabilizing and discrediting a radical and aggressive regime,  

and there are historical examples of nationalist tempers flaring at 

least for a while, and the radicals being strengthened.  I wouldn’t 

want to stipulate one or the other, but the one thing I think we 

can stipulate is that letting the most radical elements pursue 

nuclear weapons successfully would in fact strengthen the 

regime.  So I think if you care about ending the regime which is 

what one has to care about, one has to be serious about saying 

we don’t tolerate this regime, this Iranian regime acquiring 

nuclear weapons, and then acting if necessary to prevent it.   

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Karim Sadjadpour.   

KARIM SADJADPOUR 
I’d argue that at the end of the day what’s going to change this 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 62. 

regime is economic malaise.  It’s not going to be bombing it, it’s 

not going to be a nuclear issue, but similar to the Soviet Union, at 

the end of the day you can’t eat a nuclear weapon.  That’s what’s 

going to change this government, but again I think that if we do 

give it a pretext to clamp down on its domestic population it will 

very much take it, and we could see the prospect of change 

moved back many years.  I would just argue as well that if we 

somehow were able to manage a nuclear-armed Soviet Union and 

a nuclear-armed China, which had far greater appetite than Iran 

did, it seems to me preposterous that we can’t tolerate a nuclear-

armed Iran in this context, in the context of deterrence.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Well, thank you both, thank you all very much for commenting on 

our audience’s questions, and for clarifying the semantics of the 

motion, or muddying the semantics of the motion, I’m not sure 

which.  [LAUGHTER]  I’m intrigued by the idea that Bill Kristol 

came here undecided, and is newly won over to the “con” position.  

[LAUGHTER]  Which would make him a neocon, finally.  

[LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE]   It’s now time to vote.  You may think 

you’ve voted before but you’re going to vote again.  This is the 

ticket you were given on the way in, and all of you should have 

one.  If you don’t, don’t worry, an usher will provide you with one 

now.  There are three possible votes you may cast with this.  

Someone’s going to come by with a ballot box.  If you’re for the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 63. 

resolution, take off the green “for,” it’s perforated, and drop that 

in the box.  If you’re against, the red.  If you’re still undecided, or 

if you are now undecided, drop the entire untorn ballot into the 

ballot box.  As you do that, let’s make sure that the ballot boxes 

are making their way around the auditorium.  In a moment, we 

shall hear brief concluding statements from our six panelists.  

What sort of progress are the ballot boxes making.   

[PAUSE, VOICES]   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Good.  Good.  We heard earlier from each of our panelists with an 

opening statement that began with those supporting the motion.  

We’re now going to hear brief concluding statements, of no more 

than two minutes each, beginning with those who are against.  

We start with Patrick Clawson.  Patrick?    

PATRICK CLAWSON 
According to the New York Times when Kofi Annan was in Iran at 

the beginning of the month, he was quite astonished in his 

meeting with President Ahmadinejad when President 

Ahmadinejad explained that while Britain and the United States 

won the last world war, Iran was going to win the next one.   Now, 

Kofi Annan didn’t even realize there was going to be a next world 

war.  Much less, than Iran intended to emerge victorious from it.  

Do not underestimate the ambitions of a group which feels that 

they represent a quarter of the world, namely the world’s 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 64. 

Muslims.  They feel, that they’ve brought down one superpower, 

the Soviet Union, thanks to the, the Mujahadeen in Afghanistan, 

and that indeed, they can bring down another.  They have very 

extensive ambitions.  So this issue of whether to allow them to 

have nuclear weapons, is of extraordinary import to us.  That is 

why we should be prepared to make credible threats of the use of 

force.  Only through making credible threats of the use of force, is 

the kind of diplomacy that I described is going to be successful.  If 

we begin that diplomatic process by saying at the end of the day, 

we are prepared to live with you, to tolerate this nuclear Iran, we 

will get nowhere with that diplomacy.  We will get nowhere with 

forging an international consensus for strong actions of the kind 

that we have been able to use successfully to slow down Iran's 

program for the last 18 years.  Paradoxically only the credible 

threat of force is likely to prevent us from facing the danger of 

force.  We have talked a lot about whether or not the United 

States will bomb Iran.  Let us recognize, if Iran gets the bomb, it 

may bomb us.    

ROBERT SIEGEL 
Thank you Patrick Clawson.  George Perkovich.   

GEORGE PERKOVICH 
 Again I'm confused by the terms.  Because we agree with almost 

everything especially that Patrick said.  And with much that 

Reuel and Bill said about its, the nature of the Iranian 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 65. 

government.  What we want for the people of Iran.  How bad it 

would be if Iran got nuclear weapons.  And I don't understand 

what it means not to tolerate.  Because Patrick has used the verb 

say.  We should say we won't tolerate.  He said we should have 

credible threat by using force but avoids the issue of would it be 

our policy actually go to war.  Which to me means not tolerate.  

Bill's clear at least, he's saying yeah you know yeah we'll go to 

war.  Um that's what the resolution means on their side.  Not 

tolerate means physically stop.  Physically try to act against.  And 

then the question is does that guarantee success?  There is no 

guarantee of success.  We found the trouble in Iraq that was 

totally unanticipated.  Reasonable people would expect things to 

go badly in Iran.  So you can't guarantee –  

ROBERT SIEGEL 
One minute.        

GEORGE PERKOVICH  
Success.  We have an experience with China.  When China was 

getting nuclear weapons in 1964, the US Government was 

prepared to launch nuclear war against it, to destroy China, to 

keep it from getting nuclear weapons.  Then we thought no, 

instead of that we'll give nuclear weapons to India in 1963.  To 

balance China.  We were afraid that Mao was such a 

revolutionary.  He had killed more than twenty million of his own 

people.  Something the Iranian regime hasn't dreamed of.  We 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 66. 

thought it would be the end of civilization, that revolution would 

happen everywhere under this nuclear umbrella.  Well in fact we 

decided that we couldn’t stop China.  China got nuclear weapons.  

Here we are today.  China is a huge economic threat to us today 

but it isn't like you're gonna go home tonight worrying that 

China's gonna wake up and nuke the United States.  Which it 

does have the capability to do.  And which Iran for the foreseeable 

future would have no capability to do.  Do I think we should 

publicly say we'll tolerate it and welcome it?  Absolutely not.  But 

the exercise here is to try and clarify in your own mind, in your 

own plan -   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
On that note George we will remain just that clarified and no 

more.  Next concluding statement from Reuel Marc Gerecht.    

REUEL MARC GERECHT 
Well I remember having a conversation with a good friend of 

mine, Jeffrey Goldberg who now writes for the New Yorker and 

used to write for the New York Times Magazine and Jeffrey had 

just gone over to madrassas in Pakistan and he was interviewing 

young students.  And he kept asking them what do you believe 

in?  And they kept saying to him, I believe in jihad, I believe in 

killing Americans.  And he'd go to the next one – I believe in jihad, 

I believe in killing Americans.  And he kept doing that you know 

day after day.  And so he got some idea what they believed in.  

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 67. 

Now the Iranians don't ask that way all right. They're vastly more 

refined.  That's what makes them in many ways the most, and 

also contradictory, that's what makes them I would argue the 

most interesting people in the Middle East.  But do not make a 

mistake, this question, this debate is about what is at the center 

of their spirit.  And they are dedicated, they are dedicated to the 

jihad against the United States.  They are the mothership of 

much of the Islamic radicalism that we have seen and what is 

striking about the regime in Tehran is that it hasn't become more 

moderate.  It hasn't in fact gone into a period of thermidor.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
One minute.        

REUEL MARC GERECHT  
That the moderates that everybody has hope in and I have hope 

in them too, have been stuffed.  And that you do not see them 

coming forward.  You do not see them gaining power where it 

matters.  It is great and wonderful that the average Iranian on the 

street is in fact becoming much, much more moderate.  It doesn't 

matter.  What matters is the people at the top and they have not 

and I sincerely suggest that you do not want people like that who 

believe they represent God on earth and that they represent the 

vanguard for all Muslims to have nuclear weapons.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you Reuel Marc Gerecht.  Now to one of the most 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 68. 

interesting people in the Middle East, now to Sanam Vakil.     

SANAM VAKIL 
I appreciate Reuel's comments that the government of Iran is the 

vanguard of leading this one fourth of, and Patrick's, one fourth 

of the world into jihad.  But that's not the government that I'm 

aware of and that I have been studying.  Perhaps two different 

countries that we've been working on.  And my interviews that I 

recently conducted in Tehran, many people in the variety of 

camps of the regime, Ahmadinejad's ministry as well, told me 

repeatedly that it's the constant threat from abroad, regime 

change threats from the US administration that have been 

coming from the past four years.  Threats of sanctions, 

containment, isolation of this regime that are perpetuating these 

fears within the Iranian regime.  So consider that when thinking 

the Iranian mentality.  There are two ways of going forward.  We 

have the military option.  But we have an option that has never 

been actually pursued.  Twenty seven years of isolation, there's a 

wide gulf.  Why not actually try direct engagement with these 

crazy folks?  And let's see actually what they might do.  If we're 

actually dealing with them one on one bring them close.  Make 

your enemies our friends.  We can monitor their nuclear program 

and often times there's a lot of talk on the Iranian street that the 

hope of having America back in Iran will actually stimulate the 

Iranian people and recharge them and that might be the way to 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 69. 

perhaps lead to a prosperous and maybe even hopeful Iran in the 

future.   

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you Sanam Vakil.  And now I will hear from Bill Kristol.   

BILL KRISTOL 
Really just three points.  Proliferation, terror and jihad.  The 

proliferation threat is unlike that of when the Soviet Union or 

China acquired nuclear weapons.  It's not just a generic 

Venezuela, Brazil, South Africa, etc threat.  Nigeria – that is a real 

issue too.  But it is an absolute I mean it is very likely that 

Turkey, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Algeria would decide they would 

want nuclear weapons if Iran had them.  I don't know if we could 

stop them, we could offer them security guarantees, if people feel 

comfortable living in a world where we're providing security 

guarantees against a nuclear Iran for a Wahabi Saudi Arabia.  I 

suppose we can try to manage that world.  It would be safer I 

think to prevent Iran from becoming nuclear in the first place.  

We are talking about an extremely dangerous arms race in the 

most volatile region in the world.  That was not the case when 

previous nations went nuclear.  India, Pakistan a little bit more 

like that.  And Pakistan was the worst one to have allowed to 

have gone nuclear but now this is Pakistan squared.  So to speak.  

Cubed or something.  Second, terror, providing a nuclear 

umbrella for terror is not something that's been done.  The Soviet 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 70. 

Union played with terror and did some pretty bad, funded some 

pretty bad things but nothing like the intimate relation to terror 

that the Islamic Republic of Iran has had.  And people need to 

think seriously about what a nuclear umbrella over terror acts 

with the possibility of giving nuclear weapons to terror groups but 

also protecting terror groups by a threat of nuclear retaliation.  

What that does in the Middle East, here Israel I think becomes a 

central question and how does that, how does Israel then react to 

terror groups, protected so to say by Iranian nuclear threat of 

retaliation.  Finally, jihad, Patrick and Reuel have made this point 

right.  This regime, getting nuclear weapons would be the biggest 

booster shot for jihad and I think both on the Shia and Sunni 

side is possible.  That is the threat.  The jihadists need to, those 

on the wavering need to be convinced that jihadists are losing – 

letting this regime get nuclear weapons would convince too many 

people unfortunately that they're winning.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you Bill Kristol.  And lastly Karim Sadjadpour.  

KARIM SADJADPOUR 
I think one thing that's been missing tonight is Iran's ambitions.  

Iran's impetus.  We talked a lot about what the US is thinking, 

what Israel is thinking but we can't look at Iran's ambitions in a 

vacuum.  And if I would make the argument that as a – it's not 

that they want to pursue nuclear weapons to wipe Israel off the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 71. 

map.  We tried to get inside the head of Iranian leaders they say 

well this revolution of ours happened twenty seven years ago and 

to this day the US has never recognized us.  And look historically 

at countries that have pursued nuclear weapons.  Not been for 

offensive purposes.  Has been very much driven by senses of 

insecurity and defensive purposes.  I would just invoke the 

paradigm which many in the right in the US have invoked when it 

comes to Iran.  And that is one of two ticking clocks.  So there's 

the regime change clock and there's the nuclear clock.  And the 

idea is that you have to make the regime change clock in Tehran 

expire faster than the nuclear talk so when the day comes when 

Iran actually weaponizes, it will be under more friendly, 

democratic Iranian regime.  Now the fundamental contradiction of 

this policy is that when you try to expedite the regime change 

clock in Tehran you send the message to Iranian leaders that in 

fact the United States is after nuclear, is after regime change 

approach.  And therefore you need to pursue a nuclear deterrent.  

So we have to get these clocks worked up.  Is the option, is the 

goal to prevent Iran from going nuclear or is it to change the 

regime?  If we continue to try to do both, that's going to be Iran's 

greatest impetus for pursuing a nuclear weapon.    

ROBERT SIEGEL  
Thank you Karim Sadjadpour.  And thank you to all six panelists 

for your very ardent contributions.  It's now time to announce the 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 72. 

results of the audience voting and after our debaters did their 

best to sway you, you voted eighty two for the motion that we 

must tolerate a nuclear Iran.  One hundred sixteen against.  And 

twenty one remain undecided or don't know how they would 

answer that.  So congratulations to the opponents of the motion 

for their winning the debate here this evening.  And to the 

proposer, and to the proposer and his team for increasing his 

tally so much after the debate.  I'd just like to invite all of you to 

return in three weeks for the next Intelligence Squared US 

debate.  Wednesday, October 18th, it's here at Asia Society and 

Museum and the motion to be debated on that day is freedom of 

expression must include the license to offend.  And the panelists 

will include such folks as Philip Gourevitch and Christopher 

Hitchens.  I'll let you try to figure out which side of the offending 

question Hitchens is going to be on.  An edited version of tonight's 

Intelligence Squared US debate can be heard locally on WNYC AM 

820 on Friday, October 6th at 2 PM.  Outside of New York City 

you'll have to check your local NPR member station listings for 

the date and time of broadcast there.  Please be sure to pick up a 

copy of our media sponsor's Thursday edition of the Times of 

London.  And also a copy of the Times Literary Supplement on your 

way out and thanks to all of you for your support of Intelligence 

Squared US.   

 

 
 
 



Media Transcripts, Inc. 
PROGRAM Rosenkranz Foundation—“Intelligence Squared U.S.” 
 “We must tolerate a nuclear Iran (9/27/06) Page 73. 

END OF TAPE 

 
 
 


